<h3>One.</h3>

<p>
Forty-three miles as the crow flies, south of Stirmingham, there stands upon
the lonely Downs a solitary, lichen-grown post, originally intended to direct
wayfarers upon those trackless wastes.
</p>

<p>
In winter, when the herbage, always short, was shortest, and when the ground
was softened by rain, there might be detected the ruts left by waggon wheels
crossing each other in various directions; but road, or path properly
so-called, there was none, and a stranger might as well have been placed on the
desert of the Sahara. For time, and the rain blown with tremendous force across
these open Downs by the wind, had all but obliterated the painted letters upon
the cross-arms, and none but those acquainted with the country could have
understood the fragmentary inscriptions.
</p>

<p>
Some mischievous ploughboys or shepherd lads, tired of arranging flints in
fanciful rows, or cutting their names upon the turf, had improved the shining
hour by climbing up this post, pulling out the arms, and inserting them in the
opposite mortices, thereby making the poor post an unwitting liar. This same
section of the population had also energetically pelted all the milestones for
far around with flints, till the graven letters upon them were beaten out. Such
wooden wit was their only resource in a place where <i>Punch</i> never
penetrated; for this lonesome spot was appropriately named World’s End,
or, it was locally pronounced, Wurdel’s End.
</p>

<p>
The undulating downs surrounded it upon every side, dotted here and there at
long distances with farmsteads and a few cottages, and now and then a small
village or hamlet of ten or a dozen houses grouped together in a
“combe,” or narrow valley, where there happened to be a spring of
water and a “bourne” or stream. Yet World’s End was not
altogether to be despised. In this out-of-the-way place there was perhaps the
finest natural racecourse in England, to which the uneven uphill course at
Epsom, made famous by the Derby, was but an exercise ground.
</p>

<p>
A level stretch of sweet, elastic turf, half a mile wide, ran in a line
something like half a horse-shoe, under the steep Downs, for a distance of two
miles, unimpeded by hedge, ditch, or enclosed field, and obstructed only in a
few spots by thick bushes of furze and a few scattered hawthorn trees.
</p>

<p>
A spectator standing upon the Downs had the whole of this Plain, as it was
called, at once under his eye; could see a horse start and watch it gallop to
the goal. From an ancient earthwork camp or “castle,” this Down was
known as Berbury Hill, and the level plain was often called Berbury racecourse.
</p>

<p>
For from time immemorial rustic sports, and local races between the horses of
the neighbouring farmers, had taken place twice a year under the Berbury Hill.
The sports were held in the early spring; the races proper, according to
custom, came off in October. They were of the most primitive character, as may
be judged from the following poster, which the kindness of a printer and
bookbinder at Barnham—the nearest town—enables us to present to the
reader. He had preserved a copy of it, having returned the original to the
committee, who sat at the Shepherd’s Bush Inn upon the Downs:—
</p>

<p>
“Take Notiss. The Public is hereby Invite to the Grand open and Hurdle
Rases and Steple-Chaces at Wurdel’s End which is to come off on Wensday
after old Michelmuss Day. All particlars of the Stewards which is Martin Brown,
William Smith, Philip Lewis, Ted Pontin. Illegul Beting is stoped.”
</p>

<p>
This copy had in the corner, “Please print two Score and send by
Carrier,” and the unfortunate printer, ashamed to issue such a circular,
sent it back with an amended form for approval; but the carrier forgot the
letter, and it was not delivered till a week after the event—not that
much was lost by the failure to give this species of publicity to the races.
The day was well-known to all those who were likely to attend. The half-dozen
gipsies, with the cocoanut sticks and gingerbread stall, duly arrived, and took
up their quarters in a fir copse where the ground was dry, and the tree-trunks
sheltered them somewhat from the breeze which always blows over the Downs.
</p>

<p>
Most of the spectators were hill men. There still lingers the old feud between
the hill and vale—not so fierce, toned down to an occasional
growl—but Nature herself seems to have provided a never-ceasing ground of
quarrel. These two races, the hill and the vale men, must always put up
opposing prayers to heaven. The vale prays for fine and dry weather; the hill
prays for wet. How then can they possibly agree? Not more than three knots of
men and half a dozen wenches came up from the vale, and these gave pretty good
evidence that they had called <i>en route</i> at the Shepherd’s Bush, for
they were singing in chorus the lament of the young woman who went to the
trysting place to meet her faithless swain:—
</p>

<p class="poem">
But what was there to make her sad?<br />
The gate was there, but not the lad;<br />
Which made poor Mary to sigh and to say<br />
Young William shan’t be mine!
</p>

<p>
The committee were in a moveable shepherd’s hut on wheels, where also was
the weighing-room and the weights, some of which were stone
“quarters.”
</p>

<p>
Just where the judges post was erected the course was roped for a hundred yards
to ensure the horses arriving at the right place, but otherwise it was open. By
the side of these ropes the traps and four-wheelers and ramshackle gigs of the
farmers were drawn up, with their wives and daughters, who had come to see the
fun.
</p>

<p>
Among these there was one pony-carriage drawn by two handsome ponies, with a
peacock’s feather behind their ears and silver bells on the harness,
which, simple enough in itself, had a stylish look beside these battered and
worn-out vehicles. It belonged to Jason Waldron, who was generally credited
with “Esquire” after his name, and the lady who sat alone in it was
his daughter Violet. Mr Waldron was not there.
</p>

<p>
Violet was attended by a young man, plainly dressed, very pale, whose slight
frame gave him an effeminate appearance in contrast with the burly forms, and
weather-beaten faces of those acquaintances who from time to time nodded and
spoke as they passed. The pony-carriage was drawn up under an ancient hawthorn
tree, whose gnarled and twisted trunk, slow in growth, may have witnessed the
formation of the entrenchment on the hill by the Britons themselves. The first
frosts of autumn had blackened the leaves, and the mingling of the grey of the
trunk and its lichen with the dark colour of the leaves and the red peggles or
berries, under a warm, glowing, mellow sunshine, caused the tree to assume a
peculiar bronze-like tint.
</p>

<p>
It may be that the sun in all his broad domains did not shine that day upon a
more lovely being than Violet Waldron. Aymer Malet, the young man at her
side—whose Norman name ill-assorted with his coarse garments, too plainly
speaking of poverty—would have sworn that her equal did not walk the
earth, and he would have had good warrant for his belief.
</p>

<p>
Poor Aymer was out of place in that rude throng, and tormented himself with
fears lest he should appear despicable in her eyes, as so inferior to those
stalwart men in size and strength. He should have known better; but he was
young and had lived so long with those who despised him that a habit of
self-depreciation had insensibly grown upon him. It is needless to go back into
his pedigree. He was well descended, but an orphan and friendless, except for
the single uncle who had given a roof and a bed to lie on to his sister’s
child.
</p>

<p>
Martin Brown was a well-meaning man, honest and sturdy, but totally incapable
of comprehending that all men are not absorbed in sheep and turnips. He was
moderately well off, but, like all true farmers, frugal to the extreme. Never a
penny did Aymer get from him. Martin would have said: “Thee doesn’t
work; thee doesn’t even mind a few ewes. If thee’ll go bird-keeping
I’ll pay thee.”
</p>

<p>
Aymer wished for work, but not work of that class. He remembered one golden
year spent in London with a friend of his dead father (who had lost his all by
horse-racing), where he was permitted to read at will in a magnificent library,
and was supplied with money to visit those art-galleries and collections in
which his heart delighted. The friend died; the widow had no interest in him,
and Aymer returned to the turnips, and sheep. But even in that brief period the
impulse had been given; the seed had been sown and had fallen in fertile
ground, which gave increase a hundredfold.
</p>

<p>
The boy—he was but twenty then—was a born genius. He could not help
it; it would force him on. What he wanted was books. He could get no money to
purchase them; circulating libraries had not yet established agencies upon the
open Downs. By a strange contradiction he became a poacher, and the cleverest
hand at setting a wire for miles. Tenants were not allowed to shoot in that
district, but they might course hares as much as they pleased.
</p>

<p>
Aymer wired the ground game, sold them to the carriers who went by, and through
the carriers got books slowly and one by one from the county town. In this way
he bought many of Bohn’s fine series—the finest and most useful,
perhaps, ever issued—he read Plato and Aristotle, Livy,
Xenophon—the poets, the philosophers, the dramatists of ancient Rome and
Greece; and although it was not in their original tongue, the vivid imagination
of the man carried him back to their day, and enabled him to realise those
stirring scenes, to feel their passions, and comprehend their arguments. He
bought also most of the English poets, a few historians, and a large number of
scientific works, for he was devoured with an eager curiosity to understand the
stars that shone so brilliantly upon those hills—the phenomena of Nature
with which he was brought in daily contact. When he had mastered a book, his
friends the carriers, who called at the Shepherd’s Bush, took it back to
the county town and resold it for half-price, and these small sums went towards
fresh purchases.
</p>

<p>
It may have been that these very untoward circumstances which would, to all
appearance, have checked the growth of his mind, actually tended to assist it.
He saw—he felt Nature. The wind, that whistled through the grass and
sighed in the tops of the dark fir trees, spoke to him in a mystic language.
The great sun, in unclouded splendour slowly passing over the wide, endless
hills, told him a part of the secret. His books were not read, in the common
sense of the term: they were <i>thought</i> through. Not a sentence but was
thought over, examined, and its full meaning grasped and firmly imprinted on
the memory.
</p>

<p>
Poor Aymer! How desperately he longed to escape! How the soft summer breeze
seemed to woo him onwards he knew not whither! How the sun seemed to beckon,
till he fancied he could hear the echo of the surge as it roared on the
far-distant beach!
</p>

<p>
He did escape once—only for a little while, to be forced ignominiously
back again, amid the jeers of his acquaintances. This happened before he knew
Violet. By dint of catching hares and rabbits, and by selling off an
accumulation of books, and by disposing of his gold watch—his only
property—he managed to get some twenty pounds, and with that sum went
straight to Florence.
</p>

<p>
It was in spring, just before the warm summer comes, and he revelled in the
beauty of Italian skies and landscapes as he travelled. But his destination was
the Palazzo, which contains the statue of ideal woman, known as the Venus de
Medici. He stood before the living marble, rapt in thought, and then suddenly
burst into tears.
</p>

<p>
This was perhaps childish. He had his faults; he was extremely proud and
oversensitive. The sudden transition from the harsh and rude life at
World’s End, among the weather-beaten and rough-speaking rustics, to this
new world of inexpressible beauty, overcame him. Hastily he brushed those tears
away, and recovered himself; but not so quickly as to escape the observation of
two sad grey eyes. Inadvertently, as he stood before the statue, he had
interfered with the line of sight of a lady who was engaged in sketching. She
had paused, and noticing his rapt attention, made no sign that he had
interrupted her work. Thus she witnessed his weakness; and being a person of a
thoughtful, perhaps too thoughtful, turn, she wondered at and pondered over it.
</p>

<p>
Day by day Aymer, while his funds lasted and he could stay in Florence, came
and stood before the statue, lingering for hours in its close vicinity; so that
the artist, as she sketched, had the fullest opportunity of noting the strong
contrast between his delicate, intellectual features and slight, tall frame,
and the coarse dress he wore. Growing interested, she instructed her attendants
to make inquiries, and they easily elicited the name of the stranger, and the
place from which he had come.
</p>

<p>
By a curious coincidence, it so happened that the lady-artist herself was the
owner of a family mansion, and moderately large estate but a few miles from
Aymer’s home. He was, in fact, perfectly familiar with her name, which
was a household word at World’s End, where distinguished names were few;
but moving in his low sphere he had never seen her face.
</p>

<p>
Lady Lechester—Agnes Lechester to her friends—was “lord of
herself, that heritage of woe,” and being of an artistic turn of mind,
had spent much of her time upon the Continent; another reason being certain
unhappy matters connected with the history of the family mansion. She was much
struck with the singularity of a mere lad of low and poor estate thus coming to
Florence, obviously from pure love of the beautiful. Nothing approaching to
affection sprang up in her mind; it must be distinctly understood that her
interest was of a different character entirely. But from that moment Aymer
unconsciously became the subject of a certain amount of surveillance. He deemed
himself despised and unnoticed by all; but there was one who had not forgotten
him.
</p>

<p>
Those happy days in lovely Florence passed like a dream. Even by living on a
few fruits and a little bread alone, the scanty stock of money he had carried
with him could not be made to last for ever. Barely a month of pure, unalloyed
pleasure—pure in every sense of the term—and poor Aymer, who knew
not how to get employment in a foreign city, was obliged to return, and Agnes
Lechester saw him no more standing in rapt admiration before the famous statue.
</p>

<p>
Aymer reached Dover with five shillings in his pocket, and walked the whole of
the distance, one hundred and fifty miles, to World’s End, often sleeping
out at night under a rick. Slight as he was in frame, he possessed considerable
power of enduring fatigue, and had a way of lounging idly along the road,
abstracted in thought, and so walking mile after mile, till he woke up at his
destination.
</p>

<p>
They laughed him to scorn at World’s End. The poor fellow wandered about
in the daytime on the Downs, hiding in the fir copses, lying on the ancient
earthwork entrenchment, and dreaming of his fair Florence, so many hundreds of
miles away. He grew dejected and hopeless till he saw Violet. Then in time, the
very destiny he deemed so harsh in confining him to that rude spot seemed even
superior to the glorious possibilities he had hoped for. For Violet took the
place of the marble goddess; yet there never was a beauty less like the Venus
de Medici. Lovely as are the ideals men have created for themselves, it
sometimes happens that Nature presents us with a rare gem, surpassing those
cold conceptions of the mind as far as the sun is above the earth.
</p>







<h3>Two.</h3>

<p>
Violet returned from a long visit to friends near London just about the time
that Aymer reached home, weary and footsore, from Dover. Although The Place, as
Jason Waldron’s house was called, was but two miles from World’s
End, Aymer had never seen her. She was but rarely at home, for Waldron had
given her the best education money could buy, and this necessitated much
absence from her native hills. But, education and visits over, Violet, with a
happy heart, returned to the dear old home at last.
</p>

<p>
It was on one lovely afternoon in May that Aymer saw her for the first time. He
was lying upon the ground hidden in the brake which grew round the hedge of a
fir copse on the Downs. Through this copse there ran a narrow green lane or
track. He was reading his favourite little book of poetry—one that he
always carried in his pocket—the tiny edition of Shakespeare’s
Poems and Sonnets, published by William James Brown, thirty years since, and
now out of print.
</p>

<p>
Somehow the spirit of those sonnets and that peculiar poetry had penetrated
into his mind. The little book was annotated on its narrow margin with notes in
his own handwriting, and he knew the greater part of it by heart. He had just
read the sonnet beginning—
</p>

<p class="poem">
My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun;<br />
Coral is far more red than her lips’ red.<br />
* * * * *<br />
And yet, by heaven, I think my love as rare<br />
As she belied with false compare,
</p>

<p>
when the sound of horse’s hoofs made him look up.
</p>

<p>
A lady, riding on a black horse, had entered the green lane, and was passing
slowly at a walk. It was Violet. Waldron. All that English beauty which seemed
to pervade the poetry of wonderful Will, to Aymer’s fancy appeared to be
hers. She passed him, and was gone, but her presence was left behind.
</p>

<p>
Aymer could not have analysed her then—if asked, he could have barely
recounted the colour of her hair. Yet she dwelt with him—hovered about
him; he fed upon the remembrance of her until he had seen her again. By slow
degrees he grew to understand the reason of her surpassing loveliness—to
note the separate features, to examine the colours and the lines that composed
this enchanting picture. A new life dawned upon him—a new worship, so to
say.
</p>

<p>
It happened that Martin Brown had some business to transact with Jason Waldron.
Waldron bore the reputation of being a “scholard;” he was known to
be comparatively wealthy; he did not mix with the society of World’s End;
and he was held in some sort of awe by the rude and uneducated residents in the
locality.
</p>

<p>
Much as he despised that useless Aymer Malet, Martin in his secret heart felt
that he was better fitted to meet and talk with Mr Waldron than himself. Aymer
was, therefore, accredited to The Place. He went with no little trepidation,
knowing that it was Violet’s home, and sharing to some extent the local
hesitation to meet Waldron, who, being an invalid, he had never seen. Mr
Waldron received him with a cordial courtesy, which quickly put him at his
ease. When the grey-haired, handsome old man, sitting in his Bath-chair in the
shadow of a sycamore tree, extended his hand and said: “I had some slight
knowledge of your father, Mr Malet—he came of a good family,” poor
Aymer forgot his coarse dress, and exhibited the bearing of a born gentleman.
He could not help admiring the garden in which he found his host. This
evidently genuine admiration pleased Waldron extremely, for the garden had been
the solace of his retired manhood, and of his helpless age. He began to talk
about it directly.
</p>

<p>
“It is the trees,” he said; “it is the trees that make it
look well. Trees are really far more beautiful than flowers. I planted most of
them; you have heard the Eastern saying, Mr Malet—that those who plant
trees live long. That yew-hedge?—no; I did not plant that. Such hedges
are rare now—that hedge has been growing fully a hundred years—the
stems, if you will look, are of immense size. To my mind, the old English yew
is a greater favourite than the many foreign evergreens now introduced. The
filbert walk?—yes; I planted that. Come and see me in a few months’
time, and you shall crack as many as you choose. The old house
picturesque?—it is: I wish I had a sketch of it. You draw?—a
little; now try. Take out your pocket-book—ah! I see you have a regular
artist’s sketchbook.”
</p>

<p>
To tell the honest truth, Aymer was not a little pleased to have the
opportunity of exhibiting his skill before some one who could appreciate it. He
was a natural draughtsman. I do not think he ever, even in later and more
fortunate days, attempted colours; but with pencil and crayon, or pen and ink,
he was inimitable. Once at work with his pencil, Aymer grew absorbed and forgot
everything—even the presence of the invalid, who watched him with
interest. The gables and the roof, the curious mullioned windows, the
chimney-stacks, the coat of arms and fantastic gargoyles, then the trees and
arbours grew upon the paper.
</p>

<p>
“Ah! that’s my window,” said a low voice.
</p>

<p>
His pencil slipped and made a thick stroke—he looked round, it was
Violet.
</p>

<p>
For the first time he looked into her eyes and met her face to face. He could
not draw. His hand would not keep steady; he blamed it to the heat of the
summer sun. Violet declared it was her fault.
</p>

<p>
Mr Waldron seized the incomplete sketch, and insisted upon Mr Malet (the title,
humble as it was, was pleasant to Aymer’s ears) returning to finish it
next day.
</p>

<p>
In his confusion Aymer somehow got away, and then remembered that the
sketchbook he had left behind was full of drawings, and amongst them there were
two that brought a flush to his brow as he thought of them. One was Violet on
horseback; the other a profile of her face. He wished to return and claim his
book, and yet he hesitated. A sweet uncertainty as to what she would think
mastered him. He dared not venture back. The next day passed, and the
next—still he did not go—a week, a fortnight.
</p>

<p>
He could not summon up courage. Then came a note for “A. Malet,
Esq”—that “Esq” subjected him to bitter ridicule from
rude old Martin—from Mr Waldron, inquiring if he had been ill, and
begging him to visit at The Place, according to promise.
</p>

<p>
There was no escape. He went; and from that hour the intimacy increased and
ripened till not a day passed without some part of it being spent with the
Waldrons. Violet had seen her portrait in the sketchbook, but she said not a
word. She made Aymer draw everything that took her fancy. Once he was bold
enough to ask to sketch her hand. She blushed, and became all dignity; Aymer
cowered. He was not bold enough. How could he be? With barely a shilling in his
pocket, rough corduroy trousers, an old battered hat, a black coat almost green
from long exposure to sun and rain;—after years of ridicule and jeering
how could he face her?
</p>

<p>
His heart was full, but his lips dared not speak. His timidity and
over-sensitiveness made him blind to signs and tokens that would have been
instantly apparent to others of harder mould. He never saw the overtures that
the growing love in Violet’s breast compelled her to offer. He tormented
himself day and night with thinking how to compass and obtain her love, when it
was his already.
</p>

<p>
The one great difficulty was his poverty. Think how he would, he could discover
no method by which it could be remedied. He had no means of obtaining
employment, and employment would imply absence from her. How could he make her
love him? He turned to his faithful friend and adviser, dear old Will. The tiny
volume of poems was carefully scanned, and he lit upon those verses
commencing—
</p>

<p class="poem">
When as thine eye hath chose the dame<br />
And stall’d the deer that thou shouldst strike.
</p>

<p>
He asked himself if he had done as the lover was advised—
</p>

<p class="poem">
And when thou com’st thy tale to tell<br />
Smooth not thy tongue with filed talk.
</p>

<p>
Certainly he had not attempted to beguile her with insinuating flattery—
</p>

<p class="poem">
But plainly say thou lov’st her well,<br />
And set her person forth to sale.
</p>

<p>
This he had not done. How dare he say he loved her well? He had not the courage
to praise her person.
</p>

<p class="poem">
And to her will frame all thy ways.
</p>

<p>
This he was willing and ready enough to do. He believed he had done so already;
but read on—
</p>

<p class="poem">
Spare not to spend, and chiefly there<br />
Where thy desert may merit praise<br />
By ringing in thy lady’s ear.
</p>

<p>
Here he was at a standstill. He could not spend; he could not even dress as a
gentleman. He could not make her rich and beautiful presents.
</p>

<p class="poem">
The strongest castle, tower, and town<br />
The golden bullet beats it down.
</p>

<p>
He had no golden bullets—to him the castle was therefore impregnable.
</p>

<p class="poem">
Serve always with assured trust,<br />
And in thy suit be humble, true—
</p>

<p>
Advice such as this last he could and did follow conscientiously.
</p>

<p class="poem">
Have you not heard it said full oft,<br />
A woman’s nay doth stand for nought?—
</p>

<p>
Encouraging to those who could press the question, but he had not even courage
to get the first nay. It was the “golden bullet”—the lack of
the power to spend—the miserable poverty which pressed upon him with a
leaden weight. He did his best to follow infallible Will’s advice. He
snared twenty hares and sold them; he had still a small gold pencil-case
left—it had belonged to his mother. He sold that also.
</p>

<p>
On foot he walked forty miles to Reading, and spent the whole proceeds in the
purchase of a pair of fine jet bracelets, which his instinct told him would
look well upon Violet’s white wrist. When he had got them, came the
difficulty—how could he give them to her? At last he employed a shepherd
lad to leave a parcel for Miss Waldron.
</p>

<p>
He kept away several days, but love was more powerful than shame. He went.
</p>

<p>
With Violet he strolled up the long shady filbert walk, with the clusters, now
ripe, hanging overhead. His heart beat fast, but he said nothing. On her part
she was silent. Suddenly she lifted up her arm and reached after a cluster of
the nuts high up. Her sleeve fell down; the beautiful arm was bare to the
elbow, and there was the bracelet!
</p>

<p>
Her eyes met his; a lovely colour suffused her cheek. An uncontrollable impulse
seized him. He caught her hand and kissed it. Why linger? No one can tell how
these things come about. Their lips met, and it is enough.
</p>

<p>
That was the happiest autumn Aymer ever knew. Even now he looks back at its
sweetness with a species of regret. The sunshine was warmer, the blue of the
sky richer, the yellow mist that hung over the landscape softer, the bee went
by with a joyous hum, the crimson-and-gold of the dying leaves was more
brilliant than ever it had been before or since. Love lent his palette to
Nature, and the world was aglow with colour. How delicious it is to see
everything through the medium, and in the company of a noble girl just ripening
into womanhood! I remember one such summer—
</p>

<p class="poem">
But age with his stealing steps<br />
Has clawed me in his clutch.
</p>

<p>
She was very beautiful; it is hard to describe her. It was not perhaps so much
the features, the hue of the hair, the colour of the eye, the complexion, or
even the shape, as the life, the vitality, the wonderful freshness which seemed
to throw a sudden light over her, as when the sunshine falls upon a bed of
flowers:—
</p>

<p class="poem">
            Idalian
Aphrodite, beautiful,<br />
Fresh as the foam, new-bathed in Paphian wells,<br />
With rosy, slender fingers backward drew<br />
From her warm brows and bosom, her deep hair<br />
Ambrosial, golden round her lucid throat<br />
And shoulder: from the violets her light foot<br />
Shone rosy-white, and o’er her rounded form<br />
Between the shadows of the vine-bunches<br />
Floated the glowing sunlights as she moved.
</p>

<p>
The modern taste for catalogues compels me to name the colour of her eye and
hair. Her eye was full, large, and lustrous; that deep black so rarely
seen—an eye that gave quick expression to the emotions of the
heart—that flashed with laughter, or melted with tenderness. Her hair was
not quite golden; it was properly brown, but so near the true golden that a
little sunlight lit it up with a glossy radiance impossible to express in
words. The complexion was that lovely mingling of red and white, which the
prince in the fairy tale prayed his lady-love might have, when he saw the
crimson blood of a raven he had slain, staining the translucent marble slab
upon which it had fallen. The nose was nearly straight; the lips full and
scarlet. She was tall, but not too tall. It is difficult for a woman to have a
good carriage unless she be of moderate height. Enough of the catalogue system.
</p>

<p>
They visited all the places in the neighbourhood where Aymer’s pencil
could find a subject. Now it was a grand old beech tree; now only a grey stone,
set up centuries and centuries since as a “stone of memorial” by
races long reduced to ashes; now The Towers, the home of Lady Lechester. With
them always went Dando, Waldron’s favourite dog, a huge mastiff, who
gambolled about in unwieldly antics at Violet’s feet.
</p>

<p>
Aymer listened to her as she played. He sat by the invalid under the shadow of
the sycamore tree near the open window, where he could see her sitting at the
piano, pouring forth the music of Mendelssohn in that peculiar monotonous
cadence which marks the master’s works and fills the mind with a pleasant
melancholy. Now and then her head turned, a glance met his, and then the long
eyelashes drooped again. Presently out she would come with a rush, making old
Dando (short for Dandolo) bound and bark with delight as he raced her round the
green, tearing her flowing dress with his teeth, and whisking away when she
tried to catch him.
</p>

<p>
The grace of her motions, the suppleness of her lithe form, filled
Aymer’s heart with a fierce desire to clasp her waist and devour her
lips, while the invalid laughed aloud at the heavy bounds of his dog. The old
man saw clearly what was going forward, yet he did not put forth his hand to
stay it. They were a happy trio that summer and autumn at World’s End.
</p>







<h3>Three.</h3>

<p>
The summer passed away, as all things do, the winter, and the spring blossomed
afresh, and still the course of true love ran smooth with Aymer and Violet.
</p>

<p>
The winter had been only one degree less pleasant than the summer. Violet had a
beautiful voice; Aymer’s was not nearly so fine: still, it was fairly
good, and scarcely an evening passed without duets and solos on the pianoforte,
while old Waldron, animated for the time beyond his wont, accompanied them upon
the violin. He had an instrument which, next to his daughter and his dog Dando,
he valued above all things. It was by Guarnerius, and he handled it with more
care than a mother does her infant, expatiating upon the quality of the wood,
the sycamore and pine, the beauty of the varnish, the peculiar, inimitable curl
of the scroll, which had genius in its very twist.
</p>

<p>
Aymer was a ready listener. In the first place, he had grown to look upon
Waldron in the light that he would have regarded an affectionate and beneficent
father. Then he was, above all things, anxious to please Violet, and he knew
that she adored the Silver Fleece, as she called him, in laughing allusion to
his odd Christian name, Jason, and to his grey hairs. And, lastly, he really
did feel a curiosity and a desire to learn.
</p>

<p>
Sometimes Aymer gave Violet lessons in drawing, and she repaid him with lessons
in French and music, being proficient in both.
</p>

<p>
After a while Waldron discovered that this boy, without means or friends, had
made himself acquainted with the classics, and had even journeyed as a pilgrim
to the shrines of ancient art at Florence.
</p>

<p>
At this he was highly pleased. He at once set to work to ground Aymer in the
original languages in which Plato and Livy wrote. He taught him to appreciate
the delicate allusions, and exquisite turn of diction, of Horace. He corrected
the crude ideas which the self-instructed student had formed, and opened to him
the wide field of modern criticism. The effect upon Aymer’s mind was most
beneficial, and the old man, while teaching the youth, felt his heart, already
predisposed, yearning towards him more and more.
</p>

<p>
To Violet this was especially a happy omen, for she, above all things, loved
her only parent, and had not ceased to fear lest her affection for Aymer should
be met by his disapproval. As time went on, the ties of intimacy still further
strengthened.
</p>

<p>
Waldron was now often seen in deep thought, and left the young people more to
themselves. He busied himself with pen and ink, with calculations and figures,
to the subject-matter of which he did not ask their attention.
</p>

<p>
Even yet Aymer had not thought of marriage; even yet he had not overcome his
constitutional sensitiveness so much as to contemplate such a possibility. It
was enough to dwell in the sunshine of her presence. Thoroughly happy in her
love, he never thought of to-morrow. Perhaps it is a matter to be regretted
that we cannot always remain in this state—ever enjoying the ideal
without approaching nearer to the realisation, for the realisation, let it be
never so glorious, is of the earth, earthy.
</p>

<p>
It is quite true that women like courage, and that boldness often goes a long
way; but it is questionable whether with high-bred natures a subdued, quiet,
and delicate manner does not go still further. Aymer was incapable of
self-laudation, of that detestable conceit which some think it proper to show
when they have made what they are pleased to call “a conquest.”
Pity the poor castles that have stooped to them!
</p>

<p>
His happiness had but one alloy—the perpetual remembrance of his own
unworthiness, the immeasurable difference in his worldly position, which made
it a presumption in him even to frequent her presence, much less to bask in her
love. There were plenty who did not fail to remind him of this discrepancy in
their mutual positions, for his intimacy at The Place could not, of course,
pass unnoticed.
</p>

<p>
Martin Brown said nothing whatever. If there was any alteration in his manner
as the truth dawned on him, it was in favour of Aymer. With such men everything
is judged by results. While Aymer went about sketching alone, he despised him
and his pencil; the moment the very same talent obtained him the notice of
those in a superior station, then Aymer was do longer such a fool. Martin said
nothing. He refrained from his former jeers, and abstained from telling Aymer
to go and mind the sheep.
</p>

<p>
It was also to his advantage that Aymer should get rich acquaintances, and so
possibly obtain a livelihood, and relieve him of an expense, which, however
small, was always a bitter subject with him.
</p>

<p>
But there were others—farmers’ sons—in the district who did
not spare Aymer. They despised him; they could not understand him; and they
hated him for his luck in carrying off the squire’s daughter. They
credited him with the most mercenary motives, and called him a beggarly
upstart. If Aymer chanced to pass near them he was saluted with ironical bows
and cheers, and hats were obsequiously doffed to “My Lord Muck,” or
“My Lord Would-Be.”
</p>

<p>
He made no reply, but the insult went home. He knew that there was a great deal
of ground for this treatment. He knew that his conduct must appear in such a
light to others; and yet how welcome they always made him at The Place. He
questioned himself if he was doing right; sometimes his pride said “Go;
carve yourself a fortune, and then return for her;” but love, strong love
always conquered and drove him forward. He deemed that, with the exception of
Violet and Waldron, all the world looked upon him with contempt. He was wrong.
</p>

<p>
In the spring, Violet began to ride again over the Downs. This habit for a
moment again lowered Aymer in his own estimation, for he had no horse to
accompany her. What was his delight and astonishment when one day Violet took
him to the stables and asked him how he liked the new grey horse. It was a
handsome animal—Aymer admired it, as in duty bound, and as, indeed, he
could not help, yet with a heart full of mortification, when Violet whispered
that papa had bought it for him to ride with her. She flung her arms, in her
own impulsive way, round his neck, kissed him, and rushed away to don her
riding-habit before he could recover from his astonishment.
</p>

<p>
It was true. In an hour’s time they were galloping over the soft springy
turf of the Downs, trying the paces of the grey, who proved faster than the
black. The rides were repeated day by day; and it often happened that, while
thus enjoying themselves, they passed one or more of those very persons who had
so often insulted Aymer.
</p>

<p>
Instead of sitting firmer and with pride in his saddle, Aymer felt that he all
the more deserved their censure, and looked the other way as he went by.
</p>

<p>
He did not know that there was one eye at least that watched him with pleasure,
and with something like a quiet envy. It was the same grey eye that had
observed, him in the Palazzo at Florence.
</p>

<p>
Agnes Lechester had returned to England to spend some time at the old Towers,
and had not failed to make inquiries for the young pilgrim who, in coarse garb,
she had seen at the shrine of art. She heard of the intimacy with Waldron, whom
she had once or twice spoken to; and as the lovers rode slowly beneath her
grand and comfortless home, she sat at her window, and paused in her art-work,
and looked down upon them and sighed. She could not but envy them their joy and
youth, their path strewn with roses and lighted by love. She had no need to
envy Violet’s beauty, for, although no longer young, Agnes Lechester was
a fine woman. It was the life, the full glowing life, she deemed so desirable.
And she rejoiced that the poor pilgrim had found so fair a lady-love. So that
there was one eye at least which, unknown to Aymer, watched him with a quiet
pleasure and approval. Had he known it, it would have encouraged him greatly.
By precipitating matters it might have prevented—but let us proceed.
</p>

<p>
Jason Waldron knew that his daughter loved, and was beloved. He was no ordinary
man. His life had been spent far from those money-making centres where, in
time, the best of natures loses its original bias, and sees nothing but gold.
Age, he believed, had given him some power of penetration; and in Aymer he
thought he had found one in a thousand—one with whom his darling
daughter’s future would be safe. “He will not follow the universal
idol,” thought the old man. “He will be content with art and
literature, with nature and with Violet. I can see nothing in store for them
but the happiest of lives.” He waited long, expecting Aymer to approach
the subject in some distant manner. At last he comprehended his reluctance.
“He is poor and proud—he is afraid, and no wonder,” he
thought. “He shall not suffer for that.”
</p>

<p>
The benevolent old man, anxious only to complete the happiness of those he
loved, resolved to be the first, and to hold out a welcoming hand. One day he
called for Aymer to his study, and motioning him to a seat, averted his face,
not to confuse him, and said that he had long seen the mutual affection between
Violet and him. He understood why Aymer had refrained from taking him into his
confidence—he could appreciate the difficulties of his position. Without
any hesitation, he approved of Violet’s choice. His own years had now
begun to weigh upon him, and he grew daily more anxious that Violet should be
settled. He proposed, therefore, that if Aymer would not mind the arrangement,
they should be united as speedily as possible, and that after a short trip they
should return and live with him at The Place. He could not spare Violet
entirely—he must hear the sound of her voice, and see the light of her
eyes, while yet the power to do so remained with him. He was not really rich.
In that poor district, indeed, he appeared so, but it was only by comparison.
Were he to be placed in some great city, side by side with the men whose trade
was gold, his little all would sink into the utmost insignificance. Beside rude
rustics, who lived from hand to mouth, content if they paid the rent, and
perhaps put by a hundred guineas in the county bant, he was well off; but not
when weighed against the world.
</p>

<p>
He had but the house he dwelt in, a few acres of surrounding pasture, and three
thousand pounds placed out on loan. This money brought in a good interest, but
he had lately thought of calling it in for greater safety, as he felt himself
to be getting old in every sense of the term.
</p>

<p>
It was obvious, therefore, that on the score of expense alone it would be
difficult for him to give a dower to Violet sufficient to support a second
home. If they could be happy with him, why he should be content.
</p>

<p>
He turned and held out his hand to Aymer. Aymer took it, but could say nothing.
He was literally overwhelmed. To him, after so long a solitude, after so much
contempt, this marvellous good fortune was overpowering. Jason pretended not to
notice his confusion.
</p>

<p>
“We understand one another,” he said. “It is agreed, is it
not?”
</p>

<p>
Despite all his attempts, Aymer could but incline his head.
</p>

<p>
“It is a lovely day—take Violet for a ride to Berbury camp.”
</p>

<p>
How Aymer managed to convey what had passed to Violet he never knew, but that
was the longest ride they ever had together, and it was dark before The Place
was reached.
</p>

<p>
Aymer did not go home after quitting Violet. He walked away upon the Downs
until safe from observation, then threw himself upon the sward, and poured out
his heart in thanksgiving. When he had grown a little calmer he leant against a
beech-trunk and gazed at the stars. In that short hour upon the solitary Downs
he lived a whole lifetime of happiness. There are some of us who can remember
such hours—they occur but once to any human being.
</p>

<p>
To do the rough residents of the district justice, so soon as it was understood
to be settled that they were to be married, then the tone of the place changed,
and they no longer insulted and annoyed him. Some wished him joy and happiness:
not without a tinge of envy at his good fortune, expressed in the rude language
of the hills, “I wish I had thee luck, lad.”
</p>

<p>
It was generally agreed that when the marriage took place there should be an
arch erected and decorated with flowers, for the bride and bridegroom to pass
under; that the path through the churchyard should be strewn with roses, that
volleys of firearms should be discharged, and the day kept as a holiday. This
was settled at the Shepherd’s Bush over foaming jugs of ale.
</p>

<p>
“Arter all,” said an old fellow, “he bean’t such a bad
sort o’ chap. A’ mind a’ tuk a main bit o’ trouble
loike to pull a ewe o’ mine out of a ditch where hur laid on hur
back.”
</p>

<p>
“Ay, ay!” said another; “and a’ drawed my little Kittie
on the kitchen wall wi’ a bit o’ charcoal as natural as ever hur
walked—zo let’s gie ’un a rouser, chaps, and no
mistake!”
</p>

<p>
This was how it happened that at World’s End Races that fateful year,
early in October, a delicate-looking young man, commonly dressed, stood beside
the pretty pony-carriage under the hawthorn tree. The marriage was fixed for
that day week.
</p>







<h3>Four.</h3>

<p>
The marriage would have taken place earlier but for two circumstances: first,
the difficulty of obtaining the wedding outfit for Violet in that
out-of-the-way place; and secondly, because Jason insisted upon some important
alterations being made in the old house, in order to render it more comfortable
for his children.
</p>

<p>
There is no event in life which causes so much discussion, such pleasant
anticipation, as the marriage-day; and at The Place there was not a single
thing left unmentioned; every detail of the ceremony was talked over, and it
was a standing joke of Jason’s to tell Violet to study her prayer-book, a
remark that never failed to make the blood mount to her forehead.
</p>

<p>
She grew somewhat pensive as the final moment approached—with all her
youth and spirits, with all the happy omens that accompanied the course of her
love, she could not view this, the most important step she would ever take,
always with thoughtless levity. She became silent and thoughtful, gave up
riding, and devoted herself almost exclusively to attending upon Jason, till
Aymer—silly fellow!—grew jealous, and declared it was unkind of her
to look forward to the wedding-day as if it was a sentence of imprisonment.
</p>

<p>
Mr Waldron had lived so retired that there was some little difficulty in fixing
upon a representative to give Violet away, for as an invalid he could not
himself go to the church; and this was the only thing he was heard to
regret—that he should not see Violet married. However, he consoled
himself with the thought that he should see her immediately afterwards, as the
church was hardly half a mile distant, down in a narrow combe or valley. After
some reflection, Mr Waldron decided upon asking his solicitor, Mr Merton, of
Barnham, to act as his representative and give the bride away.
</p>

<p>
Merton, who was an old bachelor, was really delighted at the idea, but with
true professional mendacity made an immense virtue of the sacrifice of time it
entailed. He really was so busy with a great law case just coming on that
really—but then his old friend Waldron, and lovely Miss Violet—duty
pulled him one way and inclination another, and beauty, as was proper,
triumphed.
</p>

<p>
Violet had few acquaintances, and it was more difficult still to find her a
bridesmaid—not that there were not plenty ready to fill that onerous
post—but she disliked the idea of a stranger. Mr Merton, the solicitor,
solved the difficulty by suggesting a niece of his, a merry girl whom Violet
had met once or twice.
</p>

<p>
Aymer could not do less than ask old Martin Brown to stand as his best man,
never dreaming that he would accept the task. But what was his surprise when
Martin declared that he should enjoy the fun, and would rather miss Barnham
fair than not be there. He came out tolerably handsome for him; he offered
Aymer a five-pound note to purchase a suitable dress! This note Aymer very
respectfully declined to take, and the farmer, half repenting of his
generosity, did not press him too hard. Yet he could not help expressing his
wonder as to how Aymer meant to appear at church. “Thee bisn’t
a-goin’ to marry th’ squire’s darter in thee ould hat?”
</p>

<p>
Aymer smiled and said nothing. Fortune had aided him in this way too. After
endless disappointments and “returned with thanks,” he had suddenly
received a cheque for a sketch of his which had been accepted by an illustrated
paper. Immediately afterwards came another cheque for a short story accepted by
a magazine. This success, small as it was, elated him, if anything, more than
the approaching marriage-day. He had tried, and tried, and tried, and failed
again and again, till he despaired and ceased to make the attempt, till the
necessity of obtaining some clothes drove him to the last desperate venture. He
was elated beyond measure. A successful author, a successful artist, and just
about to marry the most beautiful woman in the world!
</p>

<p>
He resolved to tell Violet nothing about it, but to show her the sketch and the
story as they were upon their trip. Thus it was that he was independent of
Martini grudging generosity. Fortune did not stop even here. As if determined
to shower delight upon him—to make up at one blow for the cruel
isolation, the miserable restraint he had undergone—she never seemed to
tire of opening up fresh vistas of pleasure. Both Violet and Aymer would have
been satisfied, and more than satisfied, with a simple visit to the seaside;
but Jason was not so easily pleased. His daughter was his life—nothing
was too good for her—and, besides, such an event happened but once in a
lifetime, and it was fit and proper that it be accompanied with memorable
circumstances. He announced his intention of sending his children to Florence.
</p>

<p>
To Florence, the beautiful city, which dwelt for ever in Aymer’s
dreams—the city he had described time after time to Violet, till the girl
thought it the finest upon earth. He was to revisit Florence, and to revisit it
with Violet! His heart was full—it would have been impossible to add
another blessing.
</p>

<p>
Violet raced about the house and the garden, teasing Dando to
distraction—all her pensiveness dispelled, murmuring
“Florence” at every turn. What further joy could there be in
store?—it was impossible. It is almost safe to say that these two were
the happiest in England. Well they might be. They had all upon their
side—i.e., youth.
</p>

<p>
Violet was to be married upon her twenty-first birthday; Aymer was twenty-three
only. Money—not riches—but sufficient for an easy life. Italy in
view—the land of the artist and the poet! It was like a fairy dream!
</p>

<p>
The days flew by. The dresses came—oh, what eager discussions and
conferences there were over the dresses! All the farmers’ daughters and
wives in the neighbourhood to whom Violet was even distantly known, claimed the
privilege to see the trousseau. In London it would have been
overlooked—there all things are upon a grand scale.
</p>

<p>
At World’s End the ladies were never tired of descanting upon the glories
of the silk and satin, the lace and tulle. How can a wretched, unsympathising
man describe the sensation produced by Violet’s wedding outfit?
</p>

<p>
The dear girl was in ecstasies. Waldron had gone to the utmost limit of his
purse—his friend Merton even frowned a little—but he argued it was
only for once—just this once—he must be permitted a little
extravagance on Violet’s marriage-day.
</p>

<p>
Aymer was again plagued with his old tormentors—they did not sneer or
jeer at him, but he had to run the gauntlet of rude jokes and rustic wit. He
forgave them, and asked as many as he could to the breakfast.
</p>

<p>
The breakfast was to be laid out in that very apartment the window of which
opened upon the garden near the sycamore tree, where he had sat so many times
listening to Violet playing upon the pianoforte. There was of course a cake,
and there was to be what had never before been seen or tasted at World’s
End from time immemorial—i.e., several dozens of champagne.
</p>

<p>
If the wedding outfit caused a sensation among the ladies, this champagne was
all the talk among the men. They thought of nothing else—it was the
subject of endless allusions and unabating anticipation. Here and there was one
who could say he had tasted the wine—when after a good hunting spin Lord
So-and-So had asked the sportsmen to refresh themselves at his mansion. But the
majority had not the faintest notion of what it was like, and formed the most
fantastic expectations. There were a few who doubted whether there would be any
champagne, and treated it as a myth, till the servants at The Place, proud of
their importance, admitted some favoured individuals who were regaled in secret
with—the taste?—no, but the view only of certain tall bottles
dressed in rosy tissue paper, upon the removal of which stood out the far-famed
silver-foil, and doubt was no more. World’s End was full of its first
champagne treat.
</p>

<p>
Old Martin Brown swelled up into a person of enormous importance, as being the
nearest relative of the bridegroom; he was looked upon as an oracle, and his
remarks listened to with intense interest at the nightly tobacco parliament at
the Shepherd’s Bush.
</p>

<p>
The carriers took fabulous reports of what was to happen at World’s End
all over the district, and scores of honest people made up their minds to
trudge to Bury Wick Church.
</p>

<p>
Aymer was no longer knocked up at five in the morning, as was the custom, to
breakfast at six. He was undisturbed. No more jeers and contempt—he was
treated with deference. “My nevvy” was a success; Martin spoke of
his “nevvy” as if the connection did him honour.
</p>

<p>
I hope among the readers of this history there will be many ladies who can
remember their feelings on the approach of the marriage-day. Let them kindly
recall those moments of wild excitement, of trepidation lest some accident
should happen, of a half-hesitation, of a desire to plunge at once and get it
over—and approximately they will understand Violet’s heart.
</p>

<p>
Even yet Fortune had not exhausted her favours. On the morning of World’s
End Races, just one short week before the day, there came a letter in an
unknown handwriting, addressed to Aymer Malet, Esq, enclosing five ten-pound
notes from an anonymous donor, who wished him every felicity, and advised him
to persevere in his art studies.
</p>

<p>
This extraordinary gift, so totally unexpected, filled Aymer with astonishment.
It seemed as if it had dropped from the skies, for he had not the remotest
suspicion that Lady Lechester was watching him with interest.
</p>

<p>
At last the day came. Violet was awake at the earliest dawn, and saw the sun
rise, clear and cloudless, from the window. It was one of those days which
sometimes occur in autumn, with all the beauty and warmth of summer, without
its burning heat, and made still more delicious by the sensation of idle
drowsiness—a day for lotos eating. The beech trees already showed an
orange tint in places; the maples were turning scarlet; the oaks had a trace of
buff. The rooks lazily cawed as they flew off with the acorns, the hills were
half hidden with a yellowy vapour, and a few distant fleecy clouds, far up,
floated in the azure. A dream-like, luxurious day, such as happens but once a
year!
</p>

<p>
Violet was up with the sun—how could she rest? Miss Merton was with her,
chatting gaily. Oh, the mysteries of the toilet! my feeble pen must leave that
topic to imagination. All I can say is, that it seemed as if it never would be
completed, notwithstanding the reiterated warnings of Jason that the time was
going fast.
</p>

<p>
There came one more pleasant surprise.
</p>

<p>
A strange man on horseback was seen riding up to The Place. This was so rare an
event that Violet’s heart beat fast, fearing lest even at the eleventh
hour something should happen to cause delay. She waited; her hands trembled.
Even the delicious toilet had to be suspended.
</p>

<p>
Footsteps came up the staircase, and then the maidservant, bearing in her hand
a small parcel, advanced to Miss Waldron. With trembling fingers she cut the
string—it was a delicate casket of mother-of-pearl. The key was in it;
she opened the lid, and an involuntary exclamation of surprise and admiration
burst from her lips.
</p>

<p>
There lay the loveliest necklace of pearls that ever the sun had shone upon.
Rich, costly pearls—pearls that were exactly fitted above all jewels for
her—pearls that she had always wished for—pearls! They were round
her neck in a moment.
</p>

<p>
Miss Merton was in raptures; the maidservant lost her wits, and ran downstairs
calling every one to go up and see Miss Vi’let “in them
shiners!”
</p>

<p>
For a while, in the surprise and wonder, the donor had been forgotten. Under
the necklace was a delicate pink note, offering Lady Lechester’s sincere
desire that Miss Waldron would long wear her little present, and wishing her
every good thing. When the wedding trip was over, would <i>Mrs</i> Aymer Malet
let her know that she might call?
</p>

<p>
Violet was not perfect any more than other girls; she had naturally a vein of
pride; she did feel no little elation at this auspicious mark of attention and
regard from a person in Lady Lechester’s position. The rank of the donor
added to the value of the gift.
</p>

<p>
Mr Waldron was much affected by this token of esteem. He could not express his
pleasure to the giver, because her messenger had galloped off the moment he had
delivered the parcel. The importance of the bride, great enough before,
immediately rose ninety per cent, in the eyes of Miss Merton, and a hundred and
fifty per cent, in the eyes of the lower classes.
</p>

<p>
Mr Waldron, examining the pearls with the eye of a connoisseur, valued them at
the very lowest at two hundred guineas. The involuntary tears of the poor
pilgrim at the shrine of art had indeed solidified into gems!
</p>

<p>
The news flew over the adjacent village of Bury Wick; the servants at The Place
spread it abroad, and in ten minutes it was known far and wide. The excitement
was intense. Champagne was grand enough—but pearls! World’s End
went wild! Champagne and pearls in one day! The whole place turned out to give
the bride a triumphant reception.
</p>

<p>
Aymer was forgotten in the excitement over Violet: forgotten, but not by the
bride. All she wished was to be able to show him her present—but
etiquette forbade his being sent for on that particular morning; he must meet
her at the church.
</p>

<p>
At the church—goodness! these pearls had delayed the toilet, and ten
o’clock had struck. At eleven—ah! at eleven!
</p>

<p>
Mr Merton had not arrived yet. He had arranged to bring his carriage; at The
Place they had nothing grander than the pony-carriage. Mr Merton, anxious to do
the thing well, as he expressed it, had sent word that he should bring his
carriage and pair of greys, to take the bride to the church.
</p>

<p>
From the earliest dawn the bells at Bury Church had been going from time to
time; and every now and then there was a scattered fire of musketry, like
skirmishing; it was the young farmers and their friends arriving with their
guns, and saluting.
</p>

<p>
But at a quarter-past ten there was a commotion. The bells burst out merrier
than ever; there was volley after volley of musketry, and cheering which
penetrated even to the chamber of the bride, where she sat before the mirror
with the pearls round her neck. It was Merton driving up in style, with his
greys decorated with wedding favours.
</p>

<p>
Bang! clang! shout, and hurrah! The hand from Barnham struck up. “See the
Conquering Hero comes!” There never was such a glorious day before or
since at World’s End.
</p>

<p>
“Nevvy,” said old Martin, already a little warm, and slapping Aymer
on the back, “nevvy, my buoy! Thee bist th’ luckiest dog in
Inglandt—champagne and purls—Ha! ha! ha!”
</p>







<h3>Five.</h3>

<p>
There was an attempt at order, but it was an utter failure. The men came
crowding after Merton’s carriage shouting and firing guns, the horses
snorted, and when Violet glanced from the window, the excitement of the scene
made her hesitate and draw back.
</p>

<p>
Merton—a regular <i>lady’s bachelor</i>, so to say—was equal
to the occasion; it was not the first at which he had assisted. He at once
became the soul of the ceremonies. He congratulated Waldron, hastened
everybody, went into the apartment where the breakfast was laid out, and with
his own hands re-arranged it to his satisfaction, shouting out all the time to
the bride to make haste.
</p>

<p>
She came at last. How few brides look well in their wedding-dresses. Even girls
who are undeniably handsome fail to stand the trying ordeal; but Violet was so
happy, so radiant, she could not help but appear to the best advantage.
</p>

<p>
Poor old Jason’s lip quivered as he gazed at his girl’s
face—for the last time as <i>his</i>—his lip quivered, and the
words of his blessing would not come; his throat swelled, and a tear gathered
in his eye. She bent and kissed him, turned and crossed the threshold.
</p>

<p>
Waldron wheeled himself to the large open window, and watched her walk to the
carriage along the carpet, put down that her feet might not touch the ground.
</p>

<p>
Who shall presume to analyse the feelings of that proud and happy old man? The
carriage moved, the crowd shouted, the guns fired; he wheeled his chair a
little round, and his head leant forward. Was he thinking of a day twenty-two
years ago, when he—not a young man, but still full of hope—led
another fair bride to the altar; a bride who had long since left him?
</p>

<p>
It was an ovation—a triumph all the way along that short half-mile to the
church: particularly as they entered the village. The greys pranced slowly,
lifting their hoofs well up, champing the bit, proud of their burden. The bride
and Miss Merton sat on one seat, Mr Merton on the other. All the men and boys
and children, all the shepherds and ploughboys for miles and miles, who had
gathered together, set up a shout. The bells rang merrily, the guns popped and
banged, handkerchiefs were waved. Across the village street, but a few yards
from the churchyard lych-gate, they had erected an arch—as had been
determined on at the Shepherd’s Bush—an arch that would have done
credit to more pretentious places, with the motto, “Joy be with
you.”
</p>

<p>
The bride dismounted at the lych-gate, which was itself covered with flowers,
and set her foot upon the scarlet cloth which the good old vicar had himself
provided, and which was laid down right to the porch.
</p>

<p>
The churchyard was full of children, chiefly girls, all carrying roses and
flowers to strew the path of the happy couple when they emerged united. In the
porch the ringers stood, four on each side, with their hands upon the ropes
ready to clash forth the news that the deed was done. The old old clerk was
there, in his black suit, which had done duty on so many occasions.
</p>

<p>
She entered the little church—small, but extremely ancient. She passed
the antique font, her light footstep pressed upon the recumbent brazen image of
a knight of other days. The venerable vicar advanced to meet her, the sunshine
falling on his grey head. But where was Aymer? Surely all must be well: but she
could not see him—not for the moment. True-hearted, loving Violet had
looked for Aymer with his old battered hat, in the corduroy trousers and the
green coat she had known him in so long.
</p>

<p>
For the moment she barely recognised the handsome, gentlemanly man before her.
It was Aymer—oh yes, it was Aymer—and how noble he looked now that
he was dressed as became him. Her heart gave another bound of
joy—involuntarily she stepped forward; what could be wanting to complete
her happiness that day? Certainly it would have been hard to have named one
single thing as lacking—not one. The pews were full of women of all
classes—they had been mostly reserved for them—the men finding
standing room as best they could; and a buzz of admiration went round the
church as Violet came into fall view. Her dress was good—it was nothing
to belles who flourish in Belgravia; but at World’s End—goodness,
it was Paris itself.
</p>

<p>
That costume formed the one great topic of conversation for years afterwards. I
know nothing of these things; but Miss Merton told me a few days ago that the
bride wore a wreath of white rosebuds and myrtle upon her lovely head, and a
veil of real Brussels lace. Her earrings were of rubies and diamonds—a
present that morning from gallant Mr Merton. She had a plain locket (with a
portrait of Waldron), and wore the splendid necklace of pearls, the gift of
Lady Lechester.
</p>

<p>
Her dress was white satin, trimmed with Brussels lace, and her feet were shod
in satin boots. Of course the “rosy, slender fingers” were cased in
the traditional white kid, and around her wrist was a bracelet of solid dull
gold—the bridegroom’s present, only delivered just as she stepped
into the carriage. She carried a bouquet of stephanotis, orange, and myrtle.
</p>

<p>
It is very likely I have misunderstood Miss Merton’s lively description,
but I think that the above was something like it. Miss Merton herself wore a
white silk trimmed with turquoise, blue, a gold locket with monogram in
turquoise and pearls, and earrings to match—a gift from Mr
Waldron—and a bouquet, I think, chiefly of white roses and jessamine.
</p>

<p>
It was a lovely sight. The sunshine fell upon the bride as she advanced up the
aisle—fell upon her through the antique panes which softened and mellowed
the light. Never did a fairer bride mount the chancel steps.
</p>

<p>
Aymer waited for her. Till now Violet had been comparatively calm; but now,
face to face with the clergyman robed in white, near to the altar and its holy
associations, as the first tones of his sonorous voice fell upon her ear, what
wonder that her knees trembled and the blood forsook her cheek. Aymer
surreptitiously, and before he had a right in etiquette to do so, touched her
hand gently—it strengthened and revived her; she blushed slightly, and
the vicar’s voice, as he gazed upon her beauty, involuntarily softened
and fell. While his lips uttered the oft-repeated words, so known by heart that
the book in his hand was unneeded, his soul offered up a prayer that this fair
creature—yes, just this one—should be spared those pains and
miseries which were ordained upon the human race.
</p>

<p>
The flag upon the church tower waved in the gentle breeze; the children were
marshalled beside the path in two long rows, with their hands full of flowers;
the women in the cottages were hunting up the old slippers and shoes; the men
looked to the caps upon the nipples of their guns; the handsome greys snorted
at the gate; and the grand old sun, above all, bathed the village in a flood of
light. I cannot linger over it longer.
</p>

<p>
The solemn adjuration was put, the question asked, and Aymer in an audible
voice replied, “I will.” The still more solemn adjuration to the
woman was repeated—it is but a few words, but it conveys a world of
meaning, it sums up a lifetime—and Violet’s answer was upon her
lips, when, before she could form the words, the chancel side-door burst open,
and there—
</p>

<p>
There before her very eyes, before the bride to whom that day was consecrated,
who for that one day was by all law human and divine to be kept from all
miserable things, there stood an awe-struck, gasping man, whose white
shirt-front was one broad sheet of crimson blood.
</p>

<p>
It is difficult to gather together, from the confused narratives of those who
were present, what really happened in consecutive order, but this is nearly it.
Not only was his shirt-front blood, but his grey hair and partially bald head
were spotted that awful red, and his trembling hands dripped—the blood
literally dripped from them on to the stone pavement. For one awful moment
there was a pause—utter silence. The man staggered forward and said in
broken tones, but audible over the whole church—
</p>

<p>
“Miss Violet; your father is <i>dead</i>!” And the bride dropped
like a stone before Aymer at her side, or Merton just behind, could grasp her
arm. She was down upon the cold stone floor, her wedding-dress all crumpled up,
her wreath fallen off, the light of life and love gone from her eyes, the happy
glow from her cheek. Even in that moment the clergyman’s heart smote him.
His impious prayer! That this one because of her beauty should be
spared—and struck down before his very eyes in the midst of her joy and
triumph. All that they could see in the body of the church was a shapeless heap
of satin where but a moment before had stood the most envied of them all.
</p>

<p>
Aymer knelt and lifted her head; it lay helpless upon his hands. As he did so
the wedding-ring, which he had ready, slipped unnoticed from his grasp and was
lost. When it was missed, days afterwards, and a search was instituted, it
could not be found, and this the superstitious treasured up as a remarkable
fact.
</p>

<p>
Merton raised her up; her frame was limp and helpless in their arms. They
carried her to the vestry and brought water. Miss Merton, trembling as she was,
did not faint; but, good, brave girl, did her best.
</p>

<p>
In the excitement over the bride, even the man who had brought this awful news
was for the moment forgotten. When they looked for him he was leaning against
the altar-rails, as if about to fall, and some of the blood was spotted on the
sacred altar-cloth. The men rushed at him; the women, afraid, held back and
watched what new harm must come. They deemed that it was some horrible
creature; they could not believe that it was only the old gardener at The
Place—Waldron’s oldest servant.
</p>

<p>
Only the gardener. He was as helpless as themselves. He had over-exerted
himself running to the church with his dreadful tidings, and being subject to
heart disease, he could barely stand, and only gasp out that “Master was
killed, and quite dead!”
</p>

<p>
The men, finding nothing could be got from him, ran out, and made direct for
The Place. Some leapt on their horses, but those on foot crossing the meadow,
as the gardener had done, got there first. All the men made for The
Place—all the women stayed to see what would become of the bride.
</p>

<p>
It was a dead faint, but it was not long before she came to, and immediately
insisted upon being taken home. They would have detained her in the vestry till
at least confirmation of the dreadful intelligence had arrived. But no, she
begged and prayed them to take her; and fearing lest uncertainty should do more
harm than certainty, they half-led, half-carried her from the church.
</p>

<p>
There was not a dry eye among the sympathising women who had remained—not
one among those rude, half-educated people whose heart was not bursting with
sorrow for the poor shrinking form that was borne through their midst.
</p>

<p>
But a few short moments since, and how proud and happy had she been advancing
up the aisle! The children were gone from the churchyard; their flowers cast
away, not in the pathway of the bride, but on the graves. In their haste, they
had trod upon the scarlet cloth laid down, and discoloured and stained it. The
ringers had deserted the bell-ropes, the village street was empty and
silent—only the unconscious flag waved upon the tower, and the arch stood
for them to pass beneath, with its motto—now a bitter
mockery—“Joy be with you!”
</p>

<p>
The carriage rolled along the road, and as they approached The Place, Merton
began to recover his professional calm; and the return of his mind to a more
normal state was marked by doubt—Was it true?
</p>

<p>
But no sooner had they entered the garden than he saw it was. The faces of the
knots of men, their low, hushed voices, all told but one tale—death had
been there!
</p>

<p>
They tried to get Violet to go upstairs to her own room, but she would not.
“I must see him!” was her cry. “I must see him!”
</p>

<p>
She pushed through them. All gave way before her. Not <i>there</i>, surely?
Yes, there—in the very room where the wedding-breakfast was laid out,
where the cake stood upon the table, and the champagne-bottles at the side;
there, in the place of joy, was the dead—dead in his armchair, close to
the window, with a ghastly wound upon the once-peaceful brow!
</p>

<p>
She threw up her hands—she uttered a great cry. Those that heard it say
it rings even now in their ears. She threw herself upon him. The crimson blood
dyed her veil, as it hung loose and torn, and tinged the innocent pearls around
her neck with its terrible hue. She fainted the second time, and would have
fallen, but Aymer caught her; and they bore her upstairs, unconscious even of
her misery.
</p>

<p>
The Place was silent. The guns were not fired, the bells were stilled. Men
moved with careful footsteps, women hushed their voices, and in the stillness
they heard the church clock slowly striking the hour of noon. At that moment
she should have been returning, radiant and blissful in triumph, to meet the
welcome from her father’s lips.
</p>

<p>
There was one that could not understand it—one dumb beast that could not
be driven away. It was Dando, the mastiff dog. Strangely enough, he avoided the
chamber of the dead, and crouched at the door of Violet’s room.
</p>

<p>
When Merton saw it he said, “Let the dog go in; maybe, he will relieve
her a little.”
</p>

<p>
But Violet, lying on a couch, conscious now and tearless, despairing in the
darkened room, motioned him away. “Take him away,” she said.
“If he had been faithful, he would have watched and guarded.”
</p>

<p>
It was a natural thought, but it was not just. Poor Dando, like the rest, had
gone to the church with the crowd; and just at the moment when he was most
wanted, then he was absent from his duty.
</p>

<p>
The great sun still bathed the village in a flood of light, the fleecy clouds
sailed slowly in the azure, the yellow mist hung over the distant hills, and
the leaves now and again rustled to the ground. But the chamber that should
have resounded with laughter and joy was darkened. One more human leaf had
fallen from the earthly tree of life. Once more those that were left behind
were worse off than those that were taken. In the words of the dear old
ballad—
</p>

<p class="poem">
My summer’s day, in lusty May,<br />
Is darked afore the noon.
</p>







<h3>Six.</h3>

<p>
Great horror fell upon the whole neighbourhood of World’s End. Not the
oldest man or woman could remember such a deed in their midst. Hitherto the
spectre of Murder had avoided those grand old hills. There was no memory of
such a thing. The nearest approach to it, which the gossips at the
Shepherd’s Bush could recall to mind, had happened long before the days
of the oldest of them all.
</p>

<p>
There was one, and one only, who declared that in his youth his father left him
in charge of the hayfield one beautiful summer’s day, to go and see a man
hung on the gallows. It was the custom then to erect the gallows at, or very
near, the spot where the crime was supposed to have been committed; often at
the cross roads.
</p>

<p>
His father told him—and having heard the tale so often it was still fresh
in his memory—that the gallows in this case was built in a narrow lane,
close to a gateway, through which the murderer had fired the fatal shot at his
victim. The spot was known to that day as Deadman’s Gate.
</p>

<p>
There was an immense crowd collected to witness the execution, and the sun
shone brilliantly on the ghastly machine. The murderer, as seems to have been
the fashion in those times, at the foot of the gallows declared his innocence;
and there were not wanting people who, in despite of the evidence, believed
him.
</p>

<p>
Just after the horrible ceremony was finished, and the lifeless body swung to
and fro, there burst a thunderstorm upon the crowd, which scattered in all
directions.
</p>

<p>
Two men took refuge under a tall tree. One said, “This is
dangerous,” and went out into the field; before the other could follow he
was struck dead by the lightning, so that there were now two corpses.
</p>

<p>
This man chanced to be one of the principal witnesses against the murderer, and
superstition firmly believed that the thunderstorm marked the Divine wrath at
the execution of an innocent man.
</p>

<p>
“The moment before,” said the narrator, “the sky was
perfectly clear; the storm came without the slightest warning.” The fact
being that the crowd were so intent upon the spectacle before them that they
had not noticed the gathering clouds.
</p>

<p>
“Ay,” concluded the narrator, who evidently shared in the
superstition, “it be an awful thing to bear witness about blood. There be
them about here as I wouldn’t stand in their shoes!”
</p>

<p>
A dead silence followed. Men understood what he meant. Already public suspicion
had fallen upon the gardener.
</p>

<p>
And Violet? Violet was calm and tearless, but heart-broken. She would not see
Aymer till the third day—it was the morning of the inquest, though she
did not know it. She saw him in her own room, still darkened. A thrush was
singing loud and clear in the tree below the window. The sun still shone as it
had done upon the bridal day, but the room was dark.
</p>

<p>
Miss Merton, despite her horror, had remained by her friend. She left the
apartment as Aymer entered, Violet could not speak to him. Her head drooped on
his shoulder, and convulsive sobs shook her form.
</p>

<p>
It is better to leave them together. The soled wedding-dress, the beautiful
pearl necklace tinged with the horrible hue of blood, had been carefully put
out of sight. People were searching for the wedding-ring in the chancel at the
church, but could not find it.
</p>

<p>
The inquest was held at the Shepherd’s Bush. As had been the case at
another inquest a century before, held at a place then almost as
retired—at Wolf’s Glow—so here the jury was formed of the
farmers of the district.
</p>

<p>
Bury Wick village was so small it had no inn, which was accounted for by the
fact that no through road ran by it. The village inn was half a mile from the
houses, alone by itself, on the edge of the highway. The Shepherd’s Bush
was small, merely a cottage made into a tavern, and the largest room barely
held the jury.
</p>

<p>
It is not material to us to go into every detail; the main features of that
painful inquiry will be sufficient.
</p>

<p>
The jury having been sworn, proceeded in solemn procession to The Place. They
entered noiselessly, not to disturb “Miss Vi’let,” for whom
the sympathy was heartfelt. They viewed the body of the good old man, cut down
at the very hour when the crowning desire of his heart was in the act of
realisation.
</p>

<p>
Such juries usually hurry through their task, shrinking from the view of the
dead which the law compels upon them—a miserable duty, and often quite
useless. But in this case they lingered in the room.
</p>

<p>
Saying little or nothing, they collected in groups of two or three around the
coffin, wistfully gazing upon the features of the dead. For the features were
placid, notwithstanding the terrible wound upon the top of the head. The peace
of his life clung to him even in a violent death.
</p>

<p>
There was not one man there who could remember a single word or deed by which
the dead had injured any human being. Quiet, retired, benevolent, largely
subscribing in an unostentatious manner to the village charities, ready always
with a helping hand to the poor—surely he ought to have been secure? What
motive could there be?
</p>

<p>
They returned to the Shepherd’s Bush. The Coroner asked for the evidence
of the person who had last seen the deceased alive. It was at once apparent
that numbers had seen him.
</p>

<p>
Mr Merton, who attended, self-employed, to watch the case for Violet, and from
attachment to his deceased friend—was selected as a representative of the
many. He deposed that he had last seen the deceased alive at quarter to eleven
on the marriage-day, at the moment that the bride took leave of her father, and
received his blessing. This simple statement produced a profound impression.
The deceased, who little thought that that parting would last for ever, was
then sitting as usual in his armchair, which he could wheel about as he chose,
close to the open window—almost <i>in</i> the window—and as witness
escorted the bride to her carriage, he looked back and saw the deceased had
partly turned round, so that the back of his head was towards the window. He
had then his velvet skullcap off, and witness believed that he was engaged in
silent prayer. This statement also naturally produced a profound effect. The
deceased’s head was partially bald, and the little hair he had was grey.
The day was very warm and sultry.
</p>

<p>
Mr Merton paused, and the next witness was the first person who had seen the
deceased after the fatal attack. This was the gardener. He appeared in court,
visibly shaking, bearing the marks of recent excitement upon his countenance.
He was an aged man, clad in corduroys and grey, much-worn coat—not the
suit he had worn on the wedding-day. His name was Edward Jenkins. His wife
pressed hard to be admitted to the court, but was forbidden, and remained
without, wringing her hands and sobbing. This witness was much confused, and
his answers were difficult to get—not from reluctance to speak, but from
excitement and fear. He produced an unfavourable impression upon the Coroner,
which the medical man in court observing, remarked that he had recently
attended the witness for heart disease at the request of the deceased, who took
a great interest in his old servant. Even this, however, did not altogether
succeed—there was an evident feeling against the man.
</p>

<p>
His evidence, when reduced to writing, was singularly simple, vague, and
unsatisfactory. Why had he not gone to the church to see the wedding, as it
appeared every single person had done, not even excepting the dog Dando? He had
much desired to see the marriage of his young mistress; but being the only
man-servant, it was his duty to see to the wines and to the table; and at the
time when the carriage started he was in the garden cutting fresh flowers, for
the purpose of strewing the lady’s footpath when she returned and
descended from the carriage, and also to decorate the breakfast table. How long
was it after the carriage started that anything happened? It seemed barely a
minute. He was in a remote part of the garden, hastily working,
when—almost immediately after the carriage started—he happened to
look up, and saw a stranger on the green in front of the house.
</p>

<p>
“Stay,” said the Coroner. “Describe that person.”
</p>

<p>
This he could not do. The glimpse he had caught was obtained through the boughs
and branches of several trees and shrubs. He could not say whether the stranger
was tall or short, dark or light, or what dress he wore; but he had a vague
idea that he had a dirty, grey coat on.
</p>

<p>
This was an unfortunate remark, for the witness at that moment wore such a
coat.
</p>

<p>
He could not say whether he had a hat or a cap on, nor what colour trousers he
wore. The stranger appeared to cross the green diagonally towards the house.
</p>

<p>
“What did witness do?”
</p>

<p>
For a moment he did nothing—it did not strike him as anything
extraordinary. That morning there had been scores of people about the house,
and numbers of strangers whom he did not know. They were attracted by the talk
about the wedding, and he thought no harm. He went on with his work as hastily
as he could, for he still hoped to have finished in time to make a short cut
across the fields, and see a part of the marriage ceremony.
</p>

<p>
He became so excited with the wish to see the ceremony that he left part of his
work undone. As he went he had to pass the open window of the dining-room,
where “master” was sitting. He was running, and actually passed the
window without noticing anything; but before he had got to the front door he
heard a groan. He ran back, and found his master prone on the floor of the
apartment, in a pool of blood. He had evidently fallen out of his armchair
forwards—started up and fallen. Witness, excessively frightened, lifted
him up, and placed him in the chair, and it was in so doing that his
shirt-front became saturated with the sanguinary stream, which also dyed his
hands. He had on a shirt-front and a black suit, in order to wait at table at
the wedding-breakfast. “Master” never spoke or groaned again. So
soon as he was placed in the armchair his head dropped on one side as if quite
dead, and witness then ran as fast as he could to the church, and crossed the
fields by a short cut which brought him to the chancel-door.
</p>

<p>
The stranger, who had crossed, the narrow “green” or lawn before
the house, had entirely disappeared, and he saw nothing of him in the house. In
his haste and confusion, he did not see with what the deed had been committed.
</p>

<p>
This was the substance of his evidence. Cross-examine him as they might,
neither the Coroner nor the jury, nor Mr Merton, could get any further light.
The witness was evidently much perturbed. There were those who thought his
manner that of a guilty man—or, at least, of a man who knew more than he
chose to tell. On the other hand, it might be the manner of an aged and weakly
man, greatly upset in mind and body by the frightful discovery he had made. All
the jury knew the relations between the witness and the deceased. Jenkins had
lived in the service of the Waldrons all his life, as had his father before
him, and the deceased had always exhibited the greatest interest in his
welfare. He had good wages, an easy occupation, and was well cared for in every
way. The most suspicious could conceive of no ground of quarrel or ill-will.
</p>

<p>
The Coroner directed the witness to remain in attendance, and the first person
who had seen the deceased after the alarm was given was called.
</p>

<p>
This was Phillip Lewis, a farmer’s son (one of the stewards at
World’s End Races), who being swift of foot had outstripped the others in
the run from the church to The Place.
</p>

<p>
Phillip Lewis found the deceased in his armchair, with his head drooping on one
side—just as the gardener Jenkins described; only this witness at once
caught sight of the weapon with which the fatal blow was given. It was lying on
the ground, just outside the open window, stained with blood, and was now
produced by the constable who had taken charge of it. It was a small bill-hook,
not so large as would be used in cutting hedges, but much the same shape.
</p>

<p>
The edge of a bill-hook, as every one knows, curves inward like a sickle, and
at the end the blade forms a sharp point, or spike. It is, therefore, a fearful
instrument with which to deliver a blow upon a bare head.
</p>

<p>
Phillip Lewis said that the gardener Jenkins recognised this hook as
his—the one he usually employed to lop the yew trees, and other favourite
trees of the deceased, and for general work in the shrubberies.
</p>

<p>
This piece of evidence made the jury look very sternly upon Jenkins. He was
asked if it was his, and at once admitted it. Where had he left it last? He
would not be quite sure, but he believed in the tool-house, which was close to
the gate in the garden wall, which led out into the fields. He had used it that
morning.
</p>

<p>
There was a distinct movement among the jury. They evidently began to suspect
Jenkins.
</p>

<p>
The medical man, Dr Parker, was the last witness. He had examined the wound the
deceased had received. There was first an incised wound, three inches long, on
the top of the skull, extending along the very crown of the head. This wound
was not deep, and, though serious, might not have proved mortal. At the end of
this wound there was a small space not cut at all, but an inch farther, just at
the top of the forehead, was a deep wound, which had penetrated to the brain,
and must have caused almost instantaneous death.
</p>

<p>
These peculiar wounds were precisely such as would have been made if a person
had approached the deceased from behind, and struck him on the bare head with
the bill-hook produced. He did not think that there was more than one blow. He
thought that the deceased when he received the blow must have started up
mechanically, and, losing power, fell forward on to the floor. He did not think
that the deceased had suffered much pain. There would not be time. The point or
spike-like end of the hook had stuck deep into the brain. He had examined the
hook, and found clotted gore and a few grey hairs upon the blade.
</p>

<p>
This concluded the evidence, and the court was cleared—after the Coroner
had whispered a few words to the police, several members of which force were
present.
</p>

<p>
The Coroner then summed up the evidence, and in a few brief but terribly
powerful sentences pointed out that suspicion could only attach to one man.
This man was left alone. He had every opportunity. The tale of the alleged
stranger on the lawn bore every mark of being apocryphal. It was obviously a
clumsy invention. The witness, who at first could not give any idea whatever as
to how the stranger was dressed, had, when pressed, in a manner identified
himself as the stranger, by describing him as wearing a grey coat.
</p>

<p>
In conclusion, he would add that the country had been scoured by the police in
the three days that had elapsed, and they had failed to find any trace of the
supposed stranger. He then left the jury to deliberate, and going out into the
air, met Mr Merton, who was more firmly convinced than the Coroner as to the
guilt of Jenkins.
</p>

<p>
“There was no motive,” he admitted, as they talked it over, walking
slowly down the road; “but crimes were not always committed from apparent
motives. On the contrary, out of ten such crimes seven would, if investigated,
seem to be committed from very inadequate motives. How could they tell that
Waldron had not called to the gardener <i>after</i> the carriage had left, and
that then a quarrel took place?” He was determined to see that justice
was done to his dead friend.
</p>

<p>
But while the Coroner and Merton thus strolled along together a new complexion
had been put upon affairs. The wretched wife of Jenkins, who had heard the
muttered communications of the police, and saw that they kept a close look-out
upon her husband, had listened as near the door as she could get, and so heard
the summing-up of the Coroner. Distracted and out of her mind with terror, a
resource occurred to her that would never have been thought of by one less
excited. She rushed from the place like mad. “Poor old Sally has lost her
head,” said the hangers about. She ran across the fields, scrambled
through the hedges, reached The Place, tore upstairs, and threw herself upon
Violet, beseeching her for the love of God to save her poor husband.
</p>

<p>
Till that moment Violet had not the least idea that Jenkins, who had carried
her in his arms many a time when she was a child, and was more like an old
friend than a servant, was under any suspicion. She rose up at once and went
downstairs, the first time since the wedding-day. Aymer and Miss Merton tried
to stay her.
</p>

<p>
“Hush!” she said; “it is my duty.”
</p>

<p>
She was obliged to pass the fatal window; she burst into tears, but hurried on.
Aymer went with her, and assisted her along the very same route that Sally had
come—over ditches and through the gaps in the hedges. Violet reached the
Shepherd’s Bush bareheaded, panting. Involuntarily, the crowd hanging
about, one and all, boors that they were, took off their hats. She knocked at
the door where the jury sat astounded, they admitted her. Strung up to the
highest pitch she burst upon them, cowed them, overcame them.
</p>

<p>
“He is innocent!” she cried, in the full tones of her beautiful
voice. “He is innocent; let him go free! He served the dead for fifty
years; they never quarrelled; they were, like old friends, not master and man.
I am the daughter of the dead. I tell you with my whole heart and soul that
that man <i>must</i> be innocent; if you injure him, it is you who are
murderers!”
</p>

<p>
She turned and left the room; many started forward to help her, but she clung
to Aymer’s arm and he got her home as quickly as he might.
</p>

<p>
It was a noble thing. It was a truly great spectacle to see that young girl
standing there and defending the poor fellow upon whom cruel suspicion had
fallen, notwithstanding her own irreparable loss. Its effect upon the jury was
immediate and irremovable. They were silent for a time. Then one after another
found twenty loopholes of doubt where before they had been so positive. After
all, why should not the gardener’s story be true? It was a simple,
artless tale; not one that would be concocted.
</p>

<p>
One juryman, who had served on the jury at the Quarter Sessions, remembered a
great counsel in some important case laying it down as an axiom, that if a man
made up a story to defend himself it was always too complete, too full of
detail. Said the juryman: “If Jenkins had made up his story, he would
have told us what the stranger wore, what colour hat, what sort of trousers,
and every particular. There was a total absence of motive. Jenkins was a quiet,
inoffensive man, whom they had all known for years and years. Very likely,
indeed, for strangers to come to The Place on that day, the fame of which had
been talked of everywhere. Perhaps the fellow wished to steal the plate on the
breakfast table, and was surprised to find the invalid there. Hearing the
gardener coming, he would make off at once, which accounted for the fact that
not a single thing was stolen. Why should they condemn one of their own parish
on such trivial evidence?” This was the right key, the <i>local</i> one.
</p>

<p>
When the Coroner was at last called in, he was astounded at the verdict
delivered to him by the foreman—“Wilful murder against a person, or
persons, unknown.” He argued with them, but in vain; the twelve had made
up their minds and were firm as a rock. He had to submit with a bad grace!
</p>

<p>
Poor Sally had a moment of joy, and clasped her husband’s neck, but it
was of brief duration. A minute afterwards the police sergeant present tapped
Jenkins on the shoulder, and took him in custody on a charge of murder.
</p>

<p>
This is the peculiarity of the law in such cases. A suspected person has to run
the gauntlet of two bodies—first, the coroner’s jury; next, the
magistrates. Many a wretch who has escaped the one has been trapped by the
other to his doom.
</p>

<p>
The handcuffs were slipped on the gardener’s wrists and he was led away
unresistingly, followed by his weeping wife and a crowd of the villagers.
</p>

<p>
As the jury emerged from the Shepherd’s Bush, which was not till
afternoon—for they had stayed to spend their ninepenny fees—there
struck on their ears a mournful sound. It was the tolling of the village bell.
The medical man had recommended immediate interment. Only three days before
those bells had merrily rung for the daughter’s bridal; now they tolled
for the father’s burial. They hastened to the church and watched the
solemn ceremony. The low broken voice of the vicar failed at the words, as they
stood by the open vault—“He cometh up, and is cut down, like a
flower; he fleeth as it were a shadow... In the midst of life we are in
death;” and the rest of the service was nearly inaudible.
</p>







<h3>Seven.</h3>

<p>
Every one knows what a dull monotony of sorrow succeeds to a great loss.
Perhaps it was fortunate for Violet that her mind was in some small measure
withdrawn from too consuming grief by the unfortunate position of the poor old
gardener. Over the very grave of the dead, as it were, she quarrelled—the
word is hardly too strong—with Merton.
</p>

<p>
Mr Merton was bitter against Jenkins. His professional mind, always ready to
put the worst aspect upon anything, quick to suspect and slow to relinquish an
idea, was convinced of the gardener’s guilt. In his zeal for the memory
of his poor friend, he forgot that he might be injuring an innocent man. He
even went so far as to speak strongly to Violet about her visit to the jury.
Surely she should have been the last to protect the murderer. He said something
like this in the heat of his temper, and regretted it afterwards. It was cruel,
unjust, and inconsiderate. Violet simply left the room and refused to see him.
</p>

<p>
Merton left the house in a rage, and resolved to spare nothing to convict the
miserable gardener. Now this quarrel produced certain events—it set on
foot another chain of circumstances. Violet was now alone at The Place. Miss
Merton could not stay longer. Before she went she asked if she should send back
the dog Dando, which Merton had taken to Barnham. Violet, still bitter, in an
unreasoning way, against the dog, said no.
</p>

<p>
“Then,” said Miss Merton, “may I take him with me to
Torquay?”
</p>

<p>
She had taken a fancy to the dog. Violet was quite willing—anything so
that he did not return to vex her with memories of the dead. Miss Merton took
him home, sorry for her friend, and yet glad to quit that dismal house and
neighbourhood.
</p>

<p>
Next day there came a note from Mr Merton, in which the writer, in a formal
way, expressed regret if he had uttered anything which had annoyed her, and
asked her to accompany Miss Merton to Torquay for change of scene. Violet
thanked him, but refused.
</p>

<p>
Aymer saw her every day. She did not give way to tears and fits of excited
sorrow, but a dull weakness seemed to have taken possession of her. All the old
spirit and joy had left her. She wandered about listlessly, stunned, in fact.
All the interest she took was in poor Jenkins’ fate. Aymer, at her wish,
went to Barnham, and engaged a lawyer to defend him. This soon reached
Merton’s ears, and annoyed him exceedingly; though, to do him justice, he
was at that very hour striving to put Violet’s affairs into order.
</p>

<p>
Those affairs were—unknown to her—in a most critical state. The
deceased, as he had told Aymer, had three thousand pounds out at interest, as
he believed, upon good security, but which he thought of calling in. This money
had been advanced to a Mr Joseph Herring, a large farmer at Belthrop, some ten
miles from World’s End.
</p>

<p>
Mr Herring was a successful man and a good man; at all events he had no worse
failing than an inordinate love of foxhunting. He had a large family, six sons
and eight daughters, but there always seemed to be plenty for them. They lived
and dressed well, rode out to the Meet, and one by one, as the sons grew older,
they were placed in farms. Foxhunting men, with the reputation of some means,
can always find favour in the eyes of landlords. If any one had been asked to
point out a fortunate family in that county, he would at once have placed his
finger upon the name of Herring.
</p>

<p>
The original home farm, where dwelt old Herring and his wife, four of the
daughters, and one son, who really managed it, was of good size, fertile, and
easily rented. The eldest son, Albert Herring, who was married and had
children, occupied a fine farm at no great distance; and the two other sons had
a smaller farm between them, and with them lived the other four sisters. Of
course it was understood that these farms had been stocked partly with borrowed
money; but that was a common thing, and there was every indication that all the
family were prospering.
</p>

<p>
It was to this Joseph Herring that Mr Waldron had advanced three thousand
pounds, taking ample security, as was believed, upon stock, and upon a small
estate which belonged to Herring’s wife. Merton recommended this Herring
as a client of his, and conducted the operation. Waldron had given Merton
notice that he wished to withdraw the money; but Merton, not thinking there was
any hurry, had not mentioned it to Joseph, when there came this awful
catastrophe at World’s End and drove the matter entirely out of his head.
But his attention was drawn back to it in an equally sudden manner. Old Joseph
Herring, the foxhunter, while out with the hounds, put his horse at a double
mound where there appeared to be a gap. This gap had been caused by cutting
down an elm tree, and he imagined that the trunk had been removed.
</p>

<p>
The morning had been cold, and although the ground was not hard there had been
what is called a “duck’s frost” in places. The horse’s
hoofs slipped upon the level butt of the tree, which had been sawn off; the
animal fell heavily, and upon his side.
</p>

<p>
In all probability, even then he would not have been much injured—for
falls in the hunting-field are as common as blackberries—had it not been
for the trunk of the elm tree. His back, in some way, came against and across
the trunk with the weight of the horse upon him, and the spine was broken. He
was carried home upon a hurdle, still living, and quite conscious.
</p>

<p>
A more terrible spectacle could not be conceived than this strong burly man
lying upon his bed, conscious, and speaking at times faintly, without a visible
wound, and yet with the certainty of death.
</p>

<p>
His sons and daughters gathered round him; all were at hand except the eldest,
Albert, and he was sent for. Joseph, who had seen too many accidents not to
know he was doomed, even if it had not been visible upon the faces of his wife
and children, betrayed the greatest uneasiness. He kept asking for
“Albert” and for “Merton.” Messenger after messenger
was despatched after both, and still they did not come.
</p>

<p>
Merton, when the messenger reached him, was in the Petty Sessional Court at
Barnham, watching the preliminary proceedings against poor Jenkins, which
happened to take place that day. He was much excited.
</p>

<p>
The lawyer whom Aymer had engaged to defend Jenkins was a professional
rival—a keen and clever man, and he had so worked up the case, and
suggested so many doubts and probabilities that the Bench of magistrates
hesitated to commit him.
</p>

<p>
It was in the thick of the fight that the messenger from the death-bed arrived.
Will it be believed, so great was the professional rivalry between these men,
and so determined was Merton to succeed in committing poor Jenkins, that he
paused, he hesitated, finally he waited till the case was finished.
</p>

<p>
“After all,” he said to himself, “very likely the accident to
Joseph is much exaggerated—people always lose their heads at such times.
At all events his neck’s not broken, and he’s alive; the messenger
doesn’t know exactly where he’s hurt. There’s no particular
hurry.”
</p>

<p>
But it so happened that there <i>was</i> a particular cause for hurry. While
Merton persuaded himself that he was looking after the cause of his murdered
friend and revenging him, that friend’s dearest one—his
Violet—was fast losing her patrimony. Even when the second messenger came
with more exact intelligence, Merton thought—“Sometimes men lie for
days with broken backs, and what does he want me for? His will is made;
I’ve got it in my office, and a very just will it is. All his affairs are
arranged, I believe. It’s all fuss and fidget.”
</p>

<p>
However, he ordered his carriage to wait at the door of the Court, and half an
hour afterwards the Bench reappeared.
</p>

<p>
The Chairman said that although there was very little evidence against the
prisoner Jenkins, although his character had been proved excellent, and
although his solicitor had most ably conducted the defence, yet the Bench felt
that the crime was one too serious for them to think of dismissing a suspected
person. The prisoner would be committed for trial at the Assizes, which
fortunately for him came on that day fortnight.
</p>

<p>
A smile of triumph lit up Merton’s face as he gathered up his papers. The
rival solicitor smiled too, and assured Aymer who was present to tell Violet
what happened, that the grand jury would be certain to throw out the bill.
There was not a tittle of evidence against the prisoner.
</p>

<p>
With this assurance Aymer mounted and rode back to Violet. At the same time
Merton, telling his coachman not to distress the horses, drove leisurely
towards the death-bed, where he had been so anxiously expected for hours.
</p>

<p>
The scene at that death-bed was extremely dreadful. The poor dying man
gradually became more and more restless and excited; nor could all the efforts
of Dr Parker, the persuasions of the clergyman, nor the tears of his wife and
children, keep him calm.
</p>

<p>
The thought of death—the idea of preparing for the hereafter never seemed
to occur to him. His one wish was to see “Albert” and
“Merton;” till feverish and his eye glittering with excitement, all
that he could ejaculate was those two names.
</p>

<p>
He remained for four hours quite conscious, and able to converse; then suddenly
there was a change, and he lost the power of answering questions, though still
faintly repeating those names. The scene was very shocking.
</p>

<p>
“Why doesn’t Albert come?” said poor Mrs Herring. “He
might have been here two hours ago. If Merton would not, Albert, my son, might
have come.”
</p>

<p>
What do you suppose Albert was doing at that moment? It is incredible, but it
is true. He was in the field superintending the placing of two new steam
ploughing engines and their tackle, watching the trial of the new engines, as
they tore up the soil with the deep plough. They had arrived that morning, just
purchased; and had it not been for their coming, he would have been in the
hunting-field with his father when the accident happened.
</p>

<p>
He could not, or would not, leave his engines. He busied about with
them—now riding himself upon the plough, now watching the drivers of the
engines, now causing experiments to be made with the scarifier. He paid little
attention to the first messenger. “Tell them I’ll be there,”
he said. Another and another messenger, still Albert remained with his plough.
</p>

<p>
“He asks for me, does he?” he said. “I’ll be there
directly.” Still he made no haste. After quitting the engines he went out
of his path to visit a flock of fat sheep, and putting up a covey of partridges
in the stubble, stayed to mark them down.
</p>

<p>
At the house he calmly refreshed himself with cheese and ale. As he mounted his
horse another messenger came, this time with a note from Dr Parker. Albert
mounted with much bustle, and made off at a gallop. Two miles on the way he
pulled up to a walk, met his shepherd, and had a talk with him about the ewes;
then the farrier on his nag, and described to him the lameness of a carthorse.
All this time his father lay dying. Strange and unaccountable indifference!
</p>

<p>
Merton reached Belthrop Farm first, and was too late. Joseph Herring was dead.
He had died without even so much as listening to the words of the
clergyman—yet he had to all appearance been a good, and even pious man
while in health. Why was he so strangely warped upon his death-bed?
</p>

<p>
“Oh! Albert—Albert, my son, my son! Why did you linger?”
cried poor Mrs Herring as he entered.
</p>

<p>
“Father?” said Albert, questioningly.
</p>

<p>
She shook her head.
</p>

<p>
“Ah!” said the son; and it sounded like a sigh of relief.
</p>

<p>
Let the grief for the dead be never so great, there quickly follows the
commonplace realities of money and affairs to be settled.
</p>

<p>
The dead man’s will was read by Merton. It was a fair and just will. Next
came the investigation into his effects, and then came the revelation. Joseph
Herring left no effects. This discovery fell upon his wife, three of the sons,
and all the daughters, like a thunderbolt. They had always believed they should
be left tolerably provided for. But when all the debts were paid there would
not be a ten-pound note.
</p>

<p>
They began to murmur, and to question, as well they might. What had become of
the three thousand pounds Herring had had of Waldron? They did not know that
their father had borrowed so much as that; they knew there was a loan from
Waldron, but never suspected the amount.
</p>

<p>
Merton, hard as it was, felt that he must draw that money in; and who was to
pay it? Why, there were no effects whatever. To pay the other debts would take
all the money that could be got, and part of the stock must be sold even then.
</p>

<p>
But this three thousand pounds. To make that good all the stock, the corn, the
implements—everything would have to be sold; including Mrs
Herring’s little estate, and the small sums that had been advanced to the
two sons who lived on one farm must be withdrawn. It was complete
ruin—ruin without reserve.
</p>

<p>
They were literally stunned, and knew not which way to turn. They could not
understand, neither could Merton, what had become of the three thousand pounds;
there was not a scrap of paper to show. Joseph had never been a good
accountant—few farmers are; but one would have thought that he would have
preserved some record of such a sum. But no—not a scrap.
</p>

<p>
Then, as said before, these children began to murmur, as well they might. Then
they began to understand, or guess dimly at the extraordinary excitement of the
dying man. It was this that weighed upon his mind, and caused him to
continually call for his eldest son and for Merton, in order that he might make
some provision.
</p>

<p>
There grew up a certain feeling against Albert. Why had he not come at
once—if he had done so, perhaps this might have been averted. A vague
distrust and suspicion of him arose. It was intensified by the knowledge that
he alone was safe. He had had a longer start and a better farm; he had the
reputation of having even saved a little money. No injury could befall him. Yet
they had not got the slightest evidence against him in any way; but a
coolness—a decided coolness arose between the brothers and sisters, and
Albert, which Albert, on his part, made no effort to remove. Ill-natured people
said he was only too glad to quarrel with them, so as to have a pretext for
refusing them assistance.
</p>

<p>
It happened, however, that one day a strange gentleman called upon Robert and
John, the two brothers, who worked one farm together. He was an agent of an
agricultural implement manufactory in a distant county, and his object was to
induce them to purchase implements of him—especially steam traction
engines. The poor brothers smiled in a melancholy way at the very idea. They
buy engines—they should soon scarcely be able to buy bread! The agent
expressed his surprise.
</p>

<p>
“But your brother seems a wealthy man,” he said. “He paid for
his engines in cash.”
</p>

<p>
“In cash!” they cried. “He told us that he paid one-fifth
only, and the rest remained in bills.”
</p>

<p>
The agent saw he had got on delicate ground; but they pressed him, and he could
not very well escape. It then came out that Albert had paid sixteen hundred
pounds in hard cash for the engines, by which, as the factory had been pressed
for money, he got them at little more than two-thirds of the value, which was
considered to be two thousand three hundred pounds.
</p>

<p>
The brothers were simply astounded. They went home and talked it over with the
fourth son, who managed the Belthrop Farm. They could not understand how Albert
came to have so much ready cash. At last the conclusion forced itself upon
them—the three thousand pounds borrowed from Waldron must have been lent
by their father to Albert. They remembered that something had been said of an
opening Albert had heard of, to add another farm to his already large tenancy.
</p>

<p>
This was the secret—poor old Joseph, a bad accountant, had given the
money to Albert, and, never thinking of dying, had postponed drawing up the
proper deeds. Without a moment’s delay they proceeded in a body to
Albert’s residence. He received them in an off-hand manner—utterly
denied that he had had the money, challenged them to find the proof, and
finally threatened if they set such a tale about the county to prosecute them
for slander. This was too much.
</p>

<p>
It is wretched to chronicle these things; but they must be written. High words
were followed by blows; there was a fight between the eldest and the next in
succession, and both being strong men, they were much knocked about. The other
brothers, maddened with their loss, actually cheered on their representative,
and stripped to take his place as soon as he should be fatigued. But at that
moment poor old Mrs Joseph Herring, who had feared this, arrived, driving up in
a pony-carriage, and sprang between the combatants. She received a severe blow,
but she separated them, and they parted with menacing gestures.
</p>

<p>
Once back at Belthrop, a kind of family council was held. Merton was sent for,
but nothing could be done. There was not a scrap of proof that Albert had had
the money. Mrs Joseph, went to him, reasoned with him, entreated him. He turned
a deaf ear to her remonstrances, and cursed her to her face. The miserable
woman returned to her despairing younger children, and never recovered the
terrible blow which the selfish, and inhuman conduct of her eldest son had
inflicted upon her. Ruin stared them in the face. Waldron’s loan was due,
and everything was already advertised for sale.
</p>







<h3>Eight.</h3>

<p>
How suddenly the leaves go in the autumn! They linger on the trees till we
almost cheat ourselves into the belief that we shall escape the inevitable
winter; that for once the inexorable march of events will be stayed, till some
morning we wake up and look forth, and lo! a wind has arisen, and the leaves
are gone.
</p>

<p>
Absorbed in the one miserable topic—the one thought of Waldron’s
terrible fate—Violet and Aymer spent several weeks almost unconsciously.
When at last they, as it were, woke up and looked forth, the actual tangible
leaves upon the trees had disappeared, and, like them, the green leaves of
their lives had been shaken down and had perished.
</p>

<p>
Even yet they had one consolation—they had themselves. The catastrophe
that had happened at the very eleventh hour, at the moment when their affection
and their hope was about to be realised, after all had only drawn them closer
together. She was more dependent upon him than ever. There was no kind Jason to
fly to now; the resources he could command were gone for ever. Had Aymer been
as selfish as he was unselfish, that very fact would not have been without its
pleasure. She could come to him only now in trouble, and she did come to him.
</p>

<p>
It may be that all that happy summer which they had spent together, strolling
about, sketching under the beech and fir; all that happy winter, with its music
and song; all the merry spring, with its rides, had not called forth such deep
and abiding love between these two as was brought into existence by these weeks
of sorrow, the first frosts of their year. They were constantly together; they
were both orphans now; they had nothing but themselves. It was natural that
they should grow all in all to each other.
</p>

<p>
There was one subject that was never alluded to between them, and that was the
interrupted marriage. It was too painful for Violet, too delicate a subject for
Aymer to mention. It was in both their minds, yet neither spoke of it. They
were, and they were not, married. In a sense—in the sense of the
publication of the banns; in the sense of the public procession to the church,
the sanction of friends, the presence of the people—in this sense they
were married. But the words “I will” had never left Violet’s
lips, however willing they were to utter the phrase; and, above all, the ring
had never been placed upon her finger. Nor could that ring be found. They were
half married.
</p>

<p>
It was a strange and exceptional case, perhaps unequalled. Morally, Violet felt
that she was his legally, Aymer feared that she was not his. He feared it,
because he knew that it would be impossible to persuade Violet to undergo the
ceremony a second time, till the memory of that dreadful day had softened and
somewhat faded. It might be months, perhaps years. The disappointment to him
was almost more than he could bear. To be so near, to have the prize within his
reach, and then to be dashed aside with the merciless hand of fate.
</p>

<p>
It would not be well that the ancient belief in destiny should again bear sway
in our time; it is contrary to the thought of the period, and yet hourly,
daily, weekly, all our lives, we seem to move, and live, and have our being
amidst circumstances that march on and on, and are utterly beyond our power to
control or guide. “Circumstances beyond my power to control” is a
household phrase—we hear it at the hearth, on the mart, in the
council-chamber. And what <i>are</i> circumstances? Why are these apparently
trivial things out of our power? Why do they perpetually evolve other
circumstances, till a chain forms itself—a net, a web—as visible,
and as tangible, as if it had been actually woven by the three sisters of
antique mythology.
</p>

<p>
The unseen, awful, inscrutable <i>necessity</i> which, heedless alike of gods
and men, marches with irresistible tread through the wonderful dramas of
Sophocles, seems to have survived the twilight of the gods, survived the age of
miracles and supernatural events. Of all that the ancients venerated and
feared, necessity alone remains a factor in modern life. What can our brightest
flashes of intelligence, our inventions, our steam engine and telegraph, effect
when confronted with those “circumstances over which we have no
control?” It is our nineteenth-century euphemism for the Fate of the
ancient world.
</p>

<p>
It is not well that we should scrutinise too closely the state of poor
Aymer’s mind. His joy and elation before that terrible day were too great
not for the fall to be felt severely. The iron of it entered into his soul. For
one moment he almost hoped against hope.
</p>

<p>
The clergyman who had officiated at the interrupted bridal came daily to see
Violet, and his true piety, his quiet parental manner, soothed and comforted
her. He whispered to Aymer that it would be well if the marriage ceremony were
completed in private, as could be done by special licence.
</p>

<p>
Aymer naturally grasped at the idea. He had still twenty pounds left of the
gift which had been sent to him anonymously. He was eager to spend it upon the
special licence, but he confessed that he dared not mention it to Violet.
</p>

<p>
The vicar undertook that task, but failed completely. Violet begged him to
spare her—to desist; she could not—not yet.
</p>

<p>
After that day she was more and more tender and affectionate to Aymer, as if to
make up to him for his loss. She said that he must take heart—they had no
need to be unhappy. In a little while, but not yet—not yet, while that
fearful vision was still floating before her eyes. But Aymer must be happy.
They had sufficient. <i>He</i> had left them all he had. That was another
reason why they should wait, in affection for his memory. They could see each
other daily—their future would be together. And Aymer, miserable as he
was, was forced to be content.
</p>

<p>
Merton had not been to The Place. Not one word had he said about the difficulty
in Herring’s affairs, and the loss of the three thousand pounds. Violet
was utterly ignorant that her fortune was gone. She spoke very bitterly of
Merton. “If he had loved poor papa,” she said, “he would
never have persecuted his faithful servant,” for nothing could shake her
belief in Jenkins’ innocence, and she did all she could to comfort the
poor gardener’s desolate wife.
</p>

<p>
Merton, on his part, did not care to approach her after the share he had had in
the commitment of Jenkins, and because he hesitated, he dreaded to face her,
and to tell her that her fortune, entrusted to his hands, was gone. He blamed
himself greatly, and yet he would not own it. He ought to have hastened to
Herring’s death-bed. Had that dying man but left one written word, to say
that Albert had had the money, all would have been well.
</p>

<p>
In the fierce attempt to revenge his old friend, he had irreparably injured
that friend’s daughter, and he dreaded the inevitable disclosure. He put
it off till the last, hoping against hope, and doing all that his
lawyer’s ingenuity could suggest to recover some part of the amount. In
endeavouring to succeed in this, he pressed hard—very hard—upon the
Herring family. He pushed them sorely, and spared not. He was bitterly
exasperated against them. Unjustly, he openly accused them of a plot to rob his
client and dishonour him.
</p>

<p>
He abused the dead man as one who had repented too late upon his death-bed. He
would take everything—down to the smallest article. Neither the
persuasions of the sons, the tears of the daughters, nor the silent despair of
the widow could move him. Of all this Violet knew nothing.
</p>

<p>
It happened that one evening not long after the lamp had been lit at The Place,
that there was heard a slight tapping or knocking at the front door. Now, this
door was close to the window where the terrible deed had been committed. By
this door the bride had stepped forth in all her gay attire; by this door the
corpse of her father had been carried forth. Villagers, and all isolated
people, are superstitious; the beliefs of those days, when all people were more
isolated than they are now, linger amongst them. By common consent, this door
was avoided by day and night. A dread destiny seemed to hang over those who
passed beneath its portal. It had been kept locked since the funeral—no
one had used it.
</p>

<p>
Violet and Aymer, sitting in the breakfast-parlour—which was the most
comfortable room in the house—were reading, and looked up mutually at the
sound of those unwonted knocks. They listened. There was a pause; and then the
taps were repeated. They were so gentle, so muffled, that they doubted the
evidence of their ears—and yet surely it was a knocking.
</p>

<p>
The servants in the kitchen heard the taps, and they cowered over the fire and
looked fearfully at each other.
</p>

<p>
One thing was certain—no person who knew The Place, no one from the
village, would come to that door. If it was any mortal man or woman, it must be
a stranger; and the last time a stranger had crossed the “green,”
all knew what had happened. If it was not a stranger, then it must be the
spirit of poor “master.” They were determined not to hear.
</p>

<p>
The taps were repeated. Violet and Aymer looked at each other.
</p>

<p>
Something very like a moan penetrated into the apartment. Aymer immediately
rose and went to the front door. He asked if any one was without; there was no
answer. He opened the door; the bitter wind, bearing with it flakes of snow,
drove into his face. For a moment, in the darkness, he could distinguish
nothing; the next, brave as he was, he recoiled; for there lay what looked like
a body at his feet. Overcoming his dread he stooped and touched—a
woman’s dress. He lifted her up—the form was heavy and inanimate in
his hands.
</p>

<p>
“Violet, dear!” he said, “it is a woman—she has
fainted; may I bring her in?”
</p>

<p>
Violet’s sympathies were at once on the alert. The woman was carried in
and laid upon the rug before the fire, the servant came crowding in to render
assistance brandy was brought, and the stranger opened her eyes and moaned
faintly. Then they saw that, although stained with travel and damp from
exposure to the drifting snow her dress was that of a lady.
</p>

<p>
Under the influence of the warm fire and the brandy she soon recovered
sufficiently to sit up. She was not handsome nor young her best features were a
broad, intellectual looking forehead, and fine dark eyes. So soon as ever she
was strong enough to speak she turned to Violet, and begged to be alone with
her for a little while.
</p>

<p>
Aymer, with all a lover’s suspicions, demurred, but Violet insisted, and
he had to be content with remaining within easy call.
</p>

<p>
He had no sooner left the room than the lady, for such she appeared to be, fell
upon her knees at Violet’s feet, and begged her for the sake of her
father’s memory to show mercy.
</p>

<p>
“Oh! spare us,” cried the unhappy creature, bursting into tears,
and wringing her hands, “spare us—we are penniless. Indeed we did
not do it purposely. We never knew—I am Esther Herring!”
</p>

<p>
It was long before Violet could gather her meaning from these incoherent
sentences. At last, under her kind words and gentle questions, Esther became
calmer and explained the miserable state of affairs. Violet sighed deeply. In
one moment her hopes were dashed to the ground: her money was gone; how could
she and Aymer—
</p>

<p>
But she bore up bravely, and listened patiently to Esther’s story. How
the widow’s heart was breaking, how the sons were despairing, and the
daughters looking forward to begging their bread. How the sale
approached—only five days more; and that thinking, and thinking day and
night over the misery of it, Esther had at last fled to Violet for
mercy—to Violet, who was ignorant of the whole matter. Fled on
foot—for all their horses were seized—on that wild winter
afternoon, facing the bitter wind, the snow, and the steep hills for ten long
miles to World’s End. Fled to fling herself at Violet’s feet, and
beg for mercy upon the widow and the fatherless children. The fatigue and her
excitement had proved too much, and she had fainted at the very door. Esther
dwelt much upon Mr Merton’s cruelty, for his insults had out her to the
quick.
</p>

<p>
Violet became very pale. She went to the door and called softly,
“Aymer.” He came, and Esther attempted to dry her tears. Violet
told him all, and took his hand.
</p>

<p>
“This cannot be,” she said; “this surely must not be. I will
do—we will do—as of a surety my father would have done. The
innocent shall not suffer for the guilty. We, Aymer and I, will give up our
claim. Tell them at your home to be comforted and to fear not.”
</p>

<p>
Esther saw that her mission was accomplished, and the reaction set in. She
became ill and feverish. Violet had her taken upstairs and waited upon her.
Aymer was left alone. He walked to the window, opened the shutters, and looked
forth. The scud flew over the sky, and the wan moon was now hidden, and now
shone forth with a pale feeble light. The heart within him was very bitter. He
did not repent the renunciation which he had confirmed; he felt that it was
right and just. But it was a terrible blow. It cut away the very ground from
beneath his feet.
</p>

<p>
The poor fellow—he was poor Aymer again now—looked forward to the
future. What could he do? The talents he possessed were useless, or nearly
useless, in a pecuniary sense. Unable to earn sufficient to support himself,
how could he marry Violet? The thought was maddening. To continue in the old,
old life at Wick Farm without a prospect was impossible. To wander a beggar
from door to door would be preferable. When he found that Violet could not
leave Esther, he walked home to Wick Farm; over the wild and open Downs, and
his heart went up in a great and bitter cry.
</p>

<p>
The blow that had struck down poor Waldron had struck him down also. It is ever
thus with evil. The circle widens, and no man knows where it will end. Yet he
did not falter.
</p>

<p>
Next day Violet wrote a curt letter to Mr Merton, requesting him to forbear
proceedings, and upbraiding him for his cruelty. She desired that he would
relinquish the charge of her affairs.
</p>

<p>
Merton, had he so chosen, might have made a difficulty about this—under
the will of Waldron—but he did not. He was, to say truth, glad of a
pretext to wash his hands of a matter in which he had figured so ill.
</p>

<p>
Violet sent for the same solicitor who had defended Jenkins, Mr Broughton, and
desired him to see that proceedings were stayed. The Herrings were saved.
Esther was sent home in the pony-carriage with the good tidings. Other debts,
unsuspected before, ate up most of the effects of Joseph Herring. The
widow’s little property had to be sold to meet them. With the trifle that
was left they removed to the farm where the two brothers worked together, and
by dint of careful management escaped starvation. Neither were they unhappy,
for misfortune and a common injury bound them closer together—all but the
widow, who never overcame the duplicity of her eldest son.
</p>

<p>
Their conduct towards Violet appears extremely selfish, but it must be
remembered that Waldron had borne the reputation of being a rich man. They
never dreamt that they had taken Violet’s all. But so it was. The dear,
dear ponies had to be sold, the servants dismissed; Violet could not keep the
house on, and in that isolated position it was difficult to let it, even at a
nominal rent.
</p>

<p>
Her friends in London made no sign. She had been a favoured guest while Waldron
lived and was reputed wealthy. Now they had lost sight of her.
</p>

<p>
To Aymer all this was as gall and wormwood. It was a comment upon his own
weakness, and impotency to aid the only one he loved. He wrote, he sketched;
but now with the strange inconsistency of fortune these works were returned, as
“not up to the standard required.” Perhaps his misfortunes affected
his skilfulness. He knew not which way to turn. At home—if Wick Farm
could be called home—the old state of things began to gradually return.
The old covert sneers and hints at his uselessness crept again into the daily
conversation. Martin, like Hercules—
</p>

<p class="poem">
Rude, unrefined in speech.<br />
Judging all wisdom by its last results,
</p>

<p>
looked upon him as a failure, and treated him accordingly. To do the young men
justice, those who had formerly taunted him now never lost an opportunity of
expressing their regret. Poor Aymer felt this worse than their sneers and
gibes. He had the fault of pride, and yet he depreciated himself habitually. He
was punished severely for his brief period of elation. What hurt him most was
his helplessness to aid Violet. And Violet, noble girl! was calm, resigned,
fearless in her trust—strong in her love of Aymer.
</p>

<p>
But the inevitable approached—“the circumstances over which we have
no control.” The day was coming when she must go, and go—whither?
</p>







<h3>Nine.</h3>

<p>
Down to one firm faith in this day of scepticism and cynicism. It may be a
despicable weakness—that cannot be helped—but nothing will ever
overthrow it. My faith is firm in the good which is possible in woman.
</p>

<p>
There is much vice, much evil, much folly; but, after all, these faults are
chiefly caused by weakness, therefore they are more or less excusable. It is
difficult for women to do good—so many and so complex are the restraints
which surround them as in a net—yet they do it. Were I in sorrow, in
trouble, or in fear, to them I should go, as hundreds—ay, countless
numbers—have previously gone, certain of assistance if assistance were
possible, and of compassion and sympathy, even if my crimes were too evil to
speak of.
</p>

<p>
There was heard one afternoon at The Place the roll of carriage-wheels—a
sound that had not been heard since the fatal bridal day. It was a damp, cold
day, and Violet had been unable to go out. A fog hung over the fields, creeping
slowly along the fallows, clinging in shapeless clouds upon the hill tops.
There was no rain, but the bare hedges were dripping large drops of water
condensed from the mist, and the dead leaves upon the ground were soddened with
damp. On such days as these, when she could not walk out and dispel her gloom
by exercise, Violet naturally felt the loss of poor Jason the more.
</p>

<p>
Aymer could not be always with her. Although their intercourse was little, if
at all, fettered by the etiquette which would have barred it in more civilised
neighbourhoods, yet he could not be always at The Place, and of late he had
been working hard at sketches and literary matters, which occupied time and
kept him from her side.
</p>

<p>
She was very lonely, longing for the evening, when he would be certain to come.
The roll of these carriage-wheels was therefore an event. Looking from the
window upstairs—that very window whence, in all the splendour of her
beauty and her wedding-dress, she had timidly glanced forth to watch the
approach of the greys—she saw a stylish brougham rapidly nearing the
house, and as it came nearer recognised the horses, and knew it was Lady
Lechester’s.
</p>

<p>
Agnes, not waiting for the footman to announce her visit, sprang out, and
walked at once to the front door. Once more there came a tapping at that dread
portal.
</p>

<p>
Conquering her fluttering heart, Violet, in a maze of bewilderment, opened it
herself. Agnes held out her hand, and kissed her twice upon the cheek and
forehead.
</p>

<p>
“Forgive me!” she said. “Forgive me for coming so soon
after—. But I wanted to see you; I had much to say to you.”
</p>

<p>
Violet began to thank her in a confused way for the pearl necklace. Agnes
stopped her; it was not that—it was about Violet herself that she had
come to talk. Even in her surprise and confusion, Violet could not help
thinking that Agnes was very beautiful. It was a species of beauty that was
precisely the opposite of Violet’s. Both gained by the contrast of the
other’s style.
</p>

<p>
Agnes Lechester was at least thirty—she might have been a year or two
older—and there hovered over her countenance an indefinable air of
melancholy, as if the memory of a past sorrow was for ever before her mind.
There was not a wrinkle, not a groove upon her pale brow, but the impress of
pain was none the less unmistakable upon her features. Her hair was very dark,
as near as possible to the raven’s hue, so often spoken of, so rarely
seen. Her eyes were large and grey, deep-set under delicate eyebrows,
well-marked, and slightly arching. Her forehead high and intellectual. The
features, the nose and mouth, were small and well-made, the ears especially
delicate. High blood and long descent spoke out clearly in her every aspect,
down even to the quiet subdued manner—the exquisite tact, and
consideration for others, which distinguished her in conversation and in daily
life.
</p>

<p>
She was about the same height as Violet, but appeared taller, being more
slightly made. She wore a simple black-silk, extremely plain, and one
mourning-ring—no other jewellery.
</p>

<p>
Violet, whose position was not a little embarrassing, found herself in a few
moments entirely at her ease, and conversing as with an old friend. Agnes did
not in a direct manner recall the terrible past, but she had a way of asking
what may be called sympathising questions, which quickly drew forth
Violet’s confidence.
</p>

<p>
For the first time she found a sister to whom she could express her feelings
unrestrainedly; and even that brief hour of companionship did her much good.
Not till all trace of distant formality had been removed, not till there had
been a certain degree of familiarity established between them, did Agnes allude
to the real object of her visit. She had come to ask Violet as a
favour—so she put it—to spend a little time with her. The Towers
were so very, very lonely—she said this in a tone that was evidently
sincere—she had so few visitors, practically none, and she should be so
glad if Violet would come. Violet saw in an instant that it was really out of
kindness to her that the invitation was given; she wished to accept it, and yet
hesitated. Agnes pressed her. Then she remembered Aymer—what would he
say? If she went, he would be alone—he would not see her, and she would
not see him. Thinking of him, a slight blush rose to her cheek. Perhaps Agnes
guessed what was passing in her mind, for she said—
</p>

<p>
“Mr Malet will, of course, come and see us—often. You must ask his
permission, you know. I will come again to-morrow and fetch you in the
brougham.”
</p>

<p>
So it was practically settled, and Agnes, after a warm farewell, departed.
Violet waited for Aymer, almost fearing he would upbraid her; but then the
separation would only be for a little time. A little time!
</p>

<p>
When Agnes Lechester came to ask her to The Towers, she came with a full
knowledge of Violet’s position—of her monetary loss, and of the
noble self-sacrifice she had made.
</p>

<p>
It chanced—“circumstances over which we have no control”
again—that Mr Broughton, to whom Violet had transferred her affairs, had
succeeded to the business of an uncle, an elder Mr Broughton, who was almost
the hereditary solicitor of the Lechester family. The position was one of great
emolument, and gave some social precedence; hence, perhaps, part of the
jealousy exhibited towards him by Mr Merton—an older man, and not so
fortunate. From him Agnes learnt the whole of the details. The frightful
catastrophe—the mystery of the murder of poor Waldron—had greatly
impressed her, and the sad circumstances of the interrupted bridal trebled the
interest she had taken in Violet and Aymer. She had instructed Broughton to
inform her of everything, and especially of how matters stood with Violet now
her father was no more. As he had now the charge of Violet’s affairs, it
was easy for him to do this; and being a comparatively young man, and with a
heart not yet quite dead to feeling, he was himself much interested in the
woman who could so willingly give up the last fragment of her fortune.
</p>

<p>
Agnes Lechester was deeply impressed by Violet’s generosity and
abrogation of self—she felt the warmest sympathy and desire to assist
her—she really was anxious to make her acquaintance, and the result was
her visit to The Place. Ostensibly the invitation was for a little time only;
but Agnes knew that the house, which alone was left to Violet, could not
support her, and intended to prolong the invitation indefinitely. She really
was lonely, and really did look forward to a companion in whom she could trust.
</p>

<p>
Aymer was overjoyed when he heard what had happened, and insisted upon Violet
accepting the invitation. Violet’s isolation, and the daily increasing
awkwardness of her position, troubled him greatly. He knew not what to do for
her. Here was a resource—a haven of safety for a while at least. Never
mind about himself—doubtless he could see her sometimes; so long as she
was safe and comfortable he should be happy, much happier even than in their
present unrestricted intercourse—though this was said with a sigh.
</p>

<p>
He lingered long with her that evening, longer than he had ever done before; it
was the last, perhaps, they should ever spend together in that house, which was
still very dear to them, notwithstanding the tragedy it had witnessed. The time
came at last when they must separate. It was the saddest walk that night that
he had ever had across the Downs. They were enveloped in a thick
mist—only instinct and long use kept him in the path—an
impenetrable gloom hung over him. Even the fir trees were silent; there was no
breeze to stir them, to produce that low sighing sound that seems to mean so
much to those who will pause and listen.
</p>

<p>
The morrow was brighter; there was a little sunshine, clouded and feeble, but
still there was a little. It would be difficult to explain the process by which
it came about. There are means of communication between persons without direct
words. Thus it happened that almost by a species of volition, Agnes Lechester,
Violet, and Aymer, before the hour to depart arrived, walked slowly and
mournfully to the old, old church, across the meadows by the well-worn path,
which the morning’s frost had left hard and dry. Since that terrible day
Violet had never been—she could not. But now, somehow, with this
newly-found companion, strengthened by two loving hearts, one on either side,
it seemed to her as if a holy peace might perhaps descend upon her if she could
visit her father’s tomb.
</p>

<p>
With her face hidden by a thick veil, the tears standing in her eyes, the poor
girl walked between them. Few words passed—silence was more natural and
fitting than speech. They met two or three persons, all of whom knew Violet and
Aymer; but these paid the homage to sorrow which the rudest tender, and went by
silently, raising their hats. No one interrupted them; no one stared with
vulgar curiosity. These three were alone—alone with the memory of the
dead. And strangely enough, all three were orphans. It was Agnes Lechester who
reminded them of that fact as they stood before the tomb; it was, she said in a
low voice, another bond of union between them.
</p>

<p>
The inscription had not yet been put up; the slab was plain. Their visit was
very short; it was more than Violet could bear. The tomb was just without the
church. Agnes motioned to Aymer to leave them; he walked away a few paces.
Together the two women entered the church; they were alone in the sacred
edifice. With slow steps poor Violet, leaning on Agnes’s arm and sobbing
bitterly, walked up that very aisle, over that very figure of the ancient
knight in brass, past the antique font—the very aisle where she had gone
in all her wedding splendour amid the admiration of the gathered crowd. And now
she came again—came with a stranger—in silence and sorrow, to kneel
on the steps that led up to the chancel to pray as best her throbbing heart
would permit. Was that prayer more for the living, or the dead?
</p>

<p>
Violet had been reared a Protestant in the Articles of the Church of England,
yet I question whether in that supreme moment her soul was not fuller of prayer
for him who had gone before, than for herself and those who still lingered on
earth. Those among us who can remember bitter hours of agony, say truly for
whom have <i>they</i> prayed? Let us not penetrate further into the sanctuary
of sorrow.
</p>

<p>
The carriage rolled away, and Aymer was alone. He watched it go down into the
valley out of sight. He turned and ascended the Downs, not daring to look back
upon the old, old house. At the summit he could command an extended view. Far
away the white road ran up over a hill, and he could see a black dot crawling
slowly up it. He knew it was the carriage; he watched it reach the top and
disappear over the brow—then she was gone.
</p>

<p>
For the first time since love had arisen in his heart he was separated from
her. It was true that it was not total separation. They were bound together by
ties which nothing could sever, and yet—the happy past was gone, to
return no more. He was at liberty to see her at The Towers; Agnes Lechester had
done her best to impress upon him that he could come whenever he chose, and
would be always welcome. But Aymer had the vaguest ideas of what life with the
upper ranks was like; he had a vague shrinking from entering this house; he
felt that he should be restrained and at a loss. There could never be that free
intercourse between him and Violet that had existed. He felt in his heart that
she would never more return to The Place. The house was to be closed that
evening; would it ever be opened again?
</p>

<p>
He crushed back his despair as best he could, and went home to his cold, lonely
room at the Wick Farm. Martin grudged him a fire even. Aymer crushed back his
heart, and tried to work. It was very difficult. When the hand and the body are
numbed with physical cold, when the heart is chilled with grief, it is hard
indeed to call the fancy into play and to amuse others. Was it not Goldsmith
who wrote the “Vicar of Wakefield” to pay the expenses of his
parent’s funeral?
</p>

<p>
Perhaps no greater proof of his wonderful genius could be given than is
presented by that oft-repeated and simple anecdote. Only a transcendant genius
could have forced itself out under such miserable circumstances. Aymer
certainly had talent, perhaps even genius, but he had not yet found his
opportunity—he was not quite certain wherein his ability really lay. All
his efforts were tentative. They failed one and all—failed just at the
moment when what he most wanted was a little encouragement. He did not spare
himself; he worked the whole day, saving only an hour put aside to walk upon
the Downs for health’s sake.
</p>

<p>
He had still fifteen pounds remaining of the munificent, and anonymous present
he had received. This he husbanded with the utmost care; it was his capital,
his all. With it he formed schemes of reaching London, and finding employment.
He only waited till a work upon which he was now engaged was finished before he
started. Now Violet was gone, there was no inducement to remain at
World’s End; far better to go out and face hard facts, and conquer them.
</p>

<p>
But as the days went by, and the work was half finished, a deadly despair
seemed to seize him. Of what use was it? Every slow post that reached that
almost forgotten spot returned to him work rejected and despised. His sketches,
he was told, “wanted spirit;” his literary labours “wanted
finish, and bore marks of haste.”
</p>

<p>
If these were useless, of what good was it to complete this book he was
writing? It would only end in another disappointment. He ceased to open his
letters; he flung them on one side. For a day or two he did nothing—he
wandered about on the open Downs, seeking consolation from Nature, and finding
none. At last, accusing himself of a lack of energy and fortitude, he set to
work again. So it was not till two days after date that he read the following
letter, which had been cast upon one side with the rest:—
</p>

<p class="letter">
“2, Market Cross, Barnham.<br />
    “Dear Sir,—I am requested by Mr Broughton to ask you to call
upon him at your earliest convenience. He has some employment to offer
you.<br />
    “With esteem, etc, etc.”
</p>

<p>
He went. Broughton received him kindly, and explained that he wanted a clerk,
not so much for technical work as for correspondence, and to give general
assistance. Aymer being a novice and completely ignorant of such duties, could
not of course expect much salary. However, he would have thirty-five shillings
per week. This offer was made partly through Lady Lechester’s influence,
partly out of the interest he himself took in Aymer. But a true lawyer, he
could not help doing even good as cheaply as possible. Aymer thanked him, and
accepted the post.
</p>







<h3>Ten.</h3>

<p>
Aymer would in times gone by have regarded the employment he had now obtained
as a great step in advance, and have rejoiced accordingly. But he had been too
near the prize for it to give him even so much as hope for the future. He
<i>wished</i> to be grateful for what he had got; he tried to look upon it as a
wonderful thing, but it was impossible. The contrast between the actual, and
what had been within his very grasp was too intense.
</p>

<p>
It was an easy place. Beyond a little correspondence to write for Mr Broughton,
and sometimes a little copying, he had practically nothing to do. His hours
were short for the business—only from ten till four; he had plenty of
time at his own disposal.
</p>

<p>
The fact was that his salary came, not directly, but indirectly from Lady
Lechester, and he was favoured accordingly. If he had known this he would have
been still more dissatisfied.
</p>

<p>
The office in which he was placed was a kind of library or retiring apartment,
opening by double doors into Mr Broughton’s private room; and he was
often called upon to bear witness to certain transactions of a strictly private
nature, and in which the solicitor told him he relied upon his honour as a
gentleman, to preserve secrecy.
</p>

<p>
Broughton really meant him well, and did his best now and then to start him on
in the acquisition of a knowledge of the law. Books were put into his hands,
and he was told what parts of them to study, and had to prepare extracts from
them occasionally. Aymer did his best, conscientiously, but he hated
it—he hated it most thoroughly. It was not altogether that the reading in
these books was dry and uninteresting to the last degree. Flat, tame,
spiritless, meaningless,—a mere collection of decisions, interpretations,
precedents—such they appeared at first. Aymer had talent and insight
sufficient to speedily observe that this forbidding aspect was not the true
one.
</p>

<p>
All these precedents, rules, decisions—these ten thousand subtle
distinctions—were much like the laws or rules of a game at chess. They
decided in what way a pawn should be moved or a bishop replaced. The science of
law seemed to him like a momentous game at chess, only the pieces were living
human creatures.
</p>

<p>
These subtle distinctions and technical divisions, formalities though they
appeared, had a meaning, and a deep one. Following his employer, Mr Broughton,
into the petty law courts at Barnham, he saw how the right and the wrong, the
sorrow or the joy of human beings depended almost upon the quibble of a word,
the incident of a slip of the pen. It was a game—a game requiring long
study, an iron memory, quick observation, and quicker decision; and he hated
it—hated it because the right appeared to be of no consequence. Truth,
and what he had always thought was meant by justice, were left entirely out of
sight.
</p>

<p>
It was not the man who had the right upon his side who won. If that was the
case, what use would there be for lawyers? Too often it was the man who had the
law upon his side, and the law only. He actually heard magistrates, and even
judges, expressing their regret that the law compelled them to give decisions
contrary to the true justice of the cause before them.
</p>

<p>
By degrees he became aware of the extraordinary fact, that with all the
cumbrous system of law phrases—a system that requires a special
dictionary—there was not even a word to express what he understood as
justice; not even a word to express it!
</p>

<p>
Justice meant a decision according to the law, and not according to the right
or wrong of the particular case proceeding; equity meant a decision based upon
a complex, antiquated, unreasonable jumble of obsolete customs. The sense of
the word “equity”—as it is used in the sublime prophecy,
“With equity shall he judge the world”—was entirely lost.
</p>

<p>
In the brief time that he had sat beside Mr Broughton in these Courts, Aymer
conceived an intense loathing for the whole system. After all, what was the
law, upon which so much was based, which over-rode equity, justice, truth, and
even conscience? What was this great fetish to which every one bowed the
knee—from the distinguished and learned judge downwards, the judge who,
in point of fact, admitted and regretted that he decided against his
conscience? It was principally precedent. Because a man had once been hung for
a murder committed in a certain manner, men must always be hung for murder.
Because a judge had once given a verdict which, under the circumstances, was as
<i>near the right</i> as he dared to go (and our judges do this), then every
one who came after must be dealt with by this immovable standard.
</p>

<p>
The very passage of time itself—the changes introduced into society,
custom, and modes of thought in the course of the years—was in itself a
strong and all-sufficient argument against this fetish precedent.
</p>

<p>
That was not all. Aymer in his position—to a certain extent
confidential—had a glimpse behind the scenes. Quick of observation and
comprehension, he saw that even this game of argument, and precedent, and
quibble was not conducted honestly. He had heard and read so much of the
freedom, the liberty of England, the safety of the subject, the equal justice
meted out to all, that he was literally confounded when the bare facts stared
him in the face.
</p>

<p>
There was jobbery, corruption under the whole of it; there was class prejudice
operating in the minds of those on the judgment-seat; there were a
thousand-and-one small, invisible strings, which palled this way and that
behind the scenes. It was, after all, a species of Punch and Judy show, moved
by wires, and learnt by rote by the exhibitor.
</p>

<p>
It sickened and wearied him. Sitting on those hard benches, he longed for
liberty—longed to escape from the depressing influence of the atmosphere
of chicanery in which he was plunged. The very sight of those hideous faces
which are sure to congregate in the criminal justice-room, seemed to weaken the
fresh young spirit within him.
</p>

<p>
Yet, as said before, Mr Broughton used him kindly. He found Aymer lodgings
cheap and fairly comfortable. Aymer had often desired to escape from his
solitary room at Wick Farm; but even that cold, lonely apartment was better
than this. These four walls had no association—they were walls
only—partly concealed with a few common prints. One of these, over the
mantelpiece, looked down upon him as he sat by his fire in the evening. He saw
it night after night, till at last that engraving seemed to almost live, and he
watched to see when the labour of the prisoner should be completed. For it was
the picture of the prisoner sitting in his cell upon a stone bench, painfully
chiselling out upon the stone wall—just where a single beam of sunlight
fell—the figure of Christ upon the Cross, with the rude tool of a common
iron nail.
</p>

<p>
He grew to understand the feelings and the thought, to sympathise in the work
of the prisoner in his dungeon. The solitary ray of sunshine that fell upon his
life was the love of Violet. He was himself confined, imprisoned by the iron
bars and the strong walls of poverty, and the tools he had at hand for his
labour of love were scanty and rude. How could he in that contracted sphere,
without travel, without change of scene and conversation with other men, ever
hope to find materials for works with which to please the world, and obtain for
himself fame and position? He understood now the deep meaning of the words put
in Ulysses’ mouth—“I am a part of all that I have met.”
They applied with tenfold force to the artistic, and to the literary career. It
was only by extended experience, by contact with the wide, wide world, that he
could hope to comprehend what it wanted. Yet it sometimes happened that even
the prisoner in his cell, by sheer self-concentration, and with the aid of the
rude tools and material within his reach, produced a work which could not be
surpassed. The poor prisoner of the picture reminded him constantly of this. He
tried. He thought and thought, till at last, in the quiet and solitude of his
lonely room, an idea did occur to him—not a very great or remarkable idea
either, but still one which, he felt, if properly carried out, might produce
substantial results.
</p>

<p>
Evening after evening, upon leaving the office, he laboured at his new
conception, illustrating his book with his own pencil, spending hour after hour
upon it far into the night. So absorbed was he upon it, that he almost
neglected Violet’s letters—almost, he could not quite—but his
notes were so short and so unlike his usual style, that she, with her knowledge
of his character, saw at once what he was doing, and kept begging him not to
overwork himself.
</p>

<p>
“Circumstances over which we have no control.” There are other
circumstances still more powerful—i.e., those circumstances which we
never even think of controlling, which happen so quietly and whose true
significance is so little apparent at the time, that we pass them by without a
thought.
</p>

<p>
It happened that Mr Broughton was engaged in a cause which necessitated
extracts to be made from a file of old newspapers. Being overworked himself,
and his staff also in full employment, he asked Aymer to do this, and to do it
especially well and carefully. Aymer began the work, and at first found it dry
enough, but as he got deeper into it, the strange contrast presented by this
contemporary chronicle with the present day gradually forced itself upon him,
and he ceased to cast aside the papers so soon as the particular extract
required was made.
</p>

<p>
Presently the idea occurred to him of writing an article for the London papers,
founded upon the curiosities of these old sheets of news. With this view, after
he had finished the work he was set to do, he got into the habit of carrying
two or three of the papers home, and re-reading and studying them, and making
notes by his own fireside. The file was really interesting. It began in the
year 1710. The <i>Barnham Chronicle</i> was one of those extremely old papers
published in county towns, which live on from year to year without an effort,
because they meet with no opposition. The circle of its readers, in all
probability, at that date—more than a century and a half after its
establishment—was scarcely larger than in the first year of publication.
It had been taken and read by whole generations. The son found it taken by his
father, and when he succeeded to the farm, to the mill, or to the shop,
continued the old subscription.
</p>

<p>
Looked at in the light of the present day, when intelligence is flashed from
end to end of the kingdom in a few hours, the <i>Barnham Chronicle</i> was all
but ridiculous. Its news was a week old or more, stale and unprofitable. It did
not even advance so far as to have a London letter; but perhaps that was no
great loss to its readers.
</p>

<p>
Yet the <i>Barnham Chronicle</i> was a “property” in more than one
sense; it paid, as well it might, at fourpence per copy, and with the monopoly
of auctioneer’s and lawyer’s advertisements in that district. And
it could boast of a more than patriarchal age.
</p>

<p>
Reading slowly, paragraph by paragraph, through this enormous file, his
note-book at his side, Aymer came upon one advertisement, simply worded, and
with no meretricious advantage given to it by large type or other
printer’s resource, yet which he read with a special interest. It
contained the name of Waldron, of The Place, Bury Wick; and that name was
sufficient to attract him. It ran thus:—
</p>

<p class="letter">
“Notice of Change of Name.—I, Arthur Sibbold, tea-dealer, of the
City of London, in the county of Middlesex, do hereby give notice, that it is
my intention to apply for permission to add to my present baptismal names the
name of Waldron, upon the occasion of my approaching marriage with Miss Annica
Waldron, of The Place, Bury Wick, co. B—, etc, etc. And that I shall be
henceforward known, called, and designated by the name of Arthur Sibbold
Waldron in all deeds, writings, etc, etc.”
</p>

<p>
To us who are acquainted with the history of the city of Stirmingham, this
entry has a wide significance; to Aymer it had none beyond the mere fact of the
mention of Waldron. He copied it into his note-book with a mental resolve to
show it to Violet, and thought no more of it. An event that happened about this
time made him forget all about what appeared to him a trivial matter. This was
the trial of Jenkins, the gardener, for the murder of Jason Waldron. Mr
Broughton, who was engaged for the defence, to instruct counsel, naturally made
much use of Aymer’s local knowledge and perfect acquaintance with the
details of that terrible day, and was thereby furnished with fresh and
overwhelming arguments.
</p>

<p>
Aymer worked with a will, for he knew that Violet was much concerned and
extremely anxious as to the result, and he watched the proceedings on the
fateful day with intense interest. It is needless to recapitulate the details
of the case, which have been already given. The result was an acquittal. The
Judge summed up in favour of the prisoner, observing that it was monstrous if a
man must be condemned to the last penalty of the law, because it so chanced
that a tool belonging to him had been snatched up as the readiest instrument
for a murderous attack. To his experience the murder did not appear at all in
the light of an ordinary crime. In the first place, there was an apparent
absence of motive. So far as was known, Waldron had no enemies and no quarrel
with any man. Evidently it was not committed with the intention of theft, as
not a single article had been missed. It appeared to him like the unaccountable
impulse of an unreasoning being; in plain words, like the act of <i>a lunatic
with homicidal tendencies</i>. The jury unanimously acquitted the prisoner, and
Aymer hastened to send the news to Violet. He could not post with it himself,
as Mr Broughton had other cases to attend to.
</p>

<p>
Poor Jenkins was free—and lost. The shock had stunned him, and he was too
old and too much weakened by disease to ever recover from it. He could not face
his native village, the place where his family, though humble, had for
generations borne a good character. He had an almost childish dread of meeting
any one from Bury Wick or World’s End, and even avoided Aymer, who sought
him in the crowd.
</p>

<p>
How truly was it said that “service is no inheritance!” After two
generations of faithful service, these poor people were practically exiled from
home and friends, and this without fault of their own. Violet would have gladly
done what she could for the aged couple. They might have, at all events, lived
at The Place and taken care of the old house, but she and Aymer lost sight of
them entirely.
</p>

<p>
All that was known was that a few weeks after the acquittal, a waggon came and
fetched away their goods from the cottage, and Jenkins was heard of no
more—for the time. He had, in fact, found work, and buried himself, as he
hoped, for ever out of sight. There was a certain natural pride in him, and it
had been cruelly trampled upon. Suffer what he might, he would not ask for
aid—not even from Violet. And he did suffer—he and his poor
shattered wife. With not exactly a bad character, but the stigma of
“murder” clinging to him, he wandered about seeking work, and
nearly starved.
</p>

<p>
Even in Bury Wick, where he was so well-known, had he returned, he would have
found a certain amount of reluctance to receive him into the old grooves. In
distant villages where the dreadful tale of blood had penetrated, and where the
people had had little or no opportunity of hearing the facts, there was still a
strong prejudice against him; and it must be owned that from an
outsider’s point of view, it <i>did</i> look suspicious that he should
have been alone near the house when the deed was committed. So it was that he
found it hard to get employment, especially now the winter was come, and labour
less in demand.
</p>

<p>
At length, worn-out and exhausted with hunger and wandering, he accepted the
wages of a boy from Albert Herring, and a waggon was sent to fetch his goods.
</p>

<p>
Albert Herring had the reputation of being a hard master, and it was well
deserved. Hard work, long hours, small pay, and that given grudgingly, and
withheld on trivial pretences—these were the practices which gained for
him the hatred of the labouring population. Yet with singular inconsistency
they were always willing to work for him. This is a phenomenon commonly to be
observed—the worst of masters can always command plenty of men.
</p>

<p>
With Jenkins it was a matter of necessity. If he could not get work he must
starve or go into the union—dreaded almost as much as the prison. Albert
kept him several days after his application—he would see about
it—he was in no hurry. He laid much stress upon the gardener’s age,
though the other assured him that willingness would compensate for that Jenkins
had been a gardener, not a labourer. It was doubtful if he would understand his
duties if he was put on to cut a hedge.
</p>

<p>
“Oh, yes!” said the old man, eagerly; “I can use an axe or a
bill-hook.”
</p>

<p>
“Ay, ay,” said Albert, brutally. “Thee can <i>use a
bill-hook</i>, so I’ve heard say.”
</p>

<p>
Jenkins bowed his head, and his lip quivered.
</p>

<p>
The upshot was that he was put on at nine shillings per week—one shilling
to be deducted for rent of a small cottage.
</p>







<h3>Eleven.</h3>

<p>
This trial of poor Jenkins took up Aymer’s time, so that he had no
leisure for his new book, which had to be laid aside; and when he was in hopes
of returning to it, another incident again interrupted him. The work he had to
do was very little after all; it was not the amount, but the character of it,
that he disliked.
</p>

<p>
Yet, notwithstanding his hatred of the law, he could not help imbibing some
small smattering which afterwards proved extremely serviceable. The change from
World’s End was also beneficial in another manner—it opened his
eyes to much that he had never suspected. If anything, his inclination hitherto
would have been to have taken most people pretty much at their word. This may
sound childish to the young men of the period, who—in the habit of
frequenting billiard saloons, horse-races, card parties, hotels, and all places
where people congregate—naturally pick up a good deal of knowledge of the
world sufficient to astonish their parents, at all events.
</p>

<p>
Aymer certainly was not a model young man. Without a doubt, if he had been
placed where such amusements were easily accessible, he would have done much as
others of his age did; but it so happened that living at World’s End,
entirely out of society, he had no such opportunities. After a month or so at
Broughton’s office his eyes began to open, and he saw that things are
very different under the surface to what they appear outwardly. He became less
ready to accept what people said, or did in the sense they wished others to see
them, and commenced a habit of deducting a large percentage from the price they
put upon themselves.
</p>

<p>
He had been three times to see Violet—staying only a few hours—and
was agreeably surprised with the pleasant reception he received from Lady
Lechester, who took an opportunity of informing him privately that she wished
Violet to continue with her. Violet was well, but dull. She was no sentimental
heroine to pine away at separation from Aymer; but it was only natural that she
should miss the old associations. Particularly she begged Aymer not to overwork
himself at night with his private labour.
</p>

<p>
Lady Lechester seconded this, saying that she had known a gentleman who, much
of the same disposition as Aymer, had lost his wits through incessant
application. He was a relation of hers, and was now confined in an asylum at
Stirmingham. To save speculation, it will be as well to at once mention that
this person was not Odo Lechester.
</p>

<p>
Aymer’s reply was that he feared he should never complete his book, for
something always seemed to happen to delay it, and now he should soon have to
accompany Mr Broughton to Stirmingham.
</p>

<p>
It was in this way. Mr Broughton, before removing to Barnham, where he
inherited the practice and most of the fortune of a deceased uncle, had lived
in Stirmingham, working as the junior partner in a firm there. He was no longer
a partner, but still continued on friendly relations with the firm; and having
much confidence in his ability, they frequently sent for him in difficult
cases.
</p>

<p>
Now this firm—Messrs Shaw, Shaw, and Simson—had one very good
client, who had been to them almost equal to an estate, bringing in a yearly
income, and paying cash without dispute. This client, or rather these clients,
was one of those very building societies which had leased old Sternhold
Baskette’s incomplete houses for a term of years.
</p>

<p>
House property is, as every one knows, fruitful in causes of
litigation—repairs, defaulting tenants, disputes, and what not; and, in
addition, there is the task of collecting the rents, and a vast variety of
smaller pickings. All these Shaw, Shaw, and Simson had enjoyed for fully half a
century, till they had come to look upon them as their legitimate right, and as
certain to descend into the hands of their successors. But as time went on,
they began to get anxious, and to perceive that there was a great deal of truth
in the ancient maxim, “This too shall pass away,” for the term of
the lease, long as it was, rapidly approached expiration.
</p>

<p>
Obviously, it was their interest to delay the delivering up of the property to
the heir, John Marese Baskette, as long as possible; and they felt the stake to
be so great, that they did not spare their own money in the effort to oust him
from his just claim.
</p>

<p>
Messrs Shaw, Shaw, and Simson were all three old and experienced men—safe
men, in every sense; but they hesitated to trust entirely to their own
ingenuity in this complicated business. They had, in fact, entrusted it to Mr
Broughton, who was not only more energetic, but was full of resources which
would never have occurred to such steady persons as the three partners.
</p>

<p>
So it happened that, as the fall of the year advanced, Broughton had his hands
full of the building societies’ business, and had engaged to proceed to
Stirmingham as their legal representative, at the great family council of the
claimants in the Sternhold Hall, which was to open in three or four days.
</p>

<p>
Another circumstance that brought Aymer into still closer contact with the
great case, was the fact that this firm of Shaw, Shaw, and Simson had an
American client, who was himself one of the claimants. His name was another
variation upon the old stem.
</p>

<p>
Anthony Baskelette was tolerably well to do. He had a great business, and had
large transactions with manufacturers in Stirmingham. These necessitated an
agent there, and Shaw, Shaw, and Simson had for years looked after his affairs.
He was one of the Original Swampers. He really could prove his direct descent
from one of old Will Baskette’s cousins, and held ample documentary
evidence; and being moderately wealthy, thought he would have a trial at the
monster estate at Stirmingham. He instructed Shaw, Shaw, and Simson to get up
his claim in a legal form, and announced his intention of accompanying the body
of the claimants to England in the steamer <i>Lucca</i>, which had been so
generously chartered by Marese.
</p>

<p>
All the correspondence from him to Shaw and Company was sent on to Barnham; and
in this way Aymer, who had much to do with Broughton’s correspondence,
began to have some idea of the magnitude of the interests at stake. Though
constitutionally averse to the law, and hating its formalities, he could not
help feeling some considerable excitement about this tremendous case, and
perhaps showed more genuine alacrity in executing Broughton’s
instructions relating to it, than he had with other matters.
</p>

<p>
At all events, Broughton told him that he should want him to act as his clerk,
or notary, during his approaching visit to Stirmingham. The lawyer had begun to
feel a certain amount of trust and confidence in Aymer, who never failed to
fulfil his orders, though obviously against the grain, and especially as
Aymer’s demeanour was quiet and gentlemanly. If he did venture to throw
out a suggestion, it was in the most respectful and diffident manner.
</p>

<p>
In this way it happened that Aymer became well up in the <i>latter</i> part of
the history of Stirmingham, especially in that section of the case which
concerned the Baskettes, and in time it grew to be almost the leading thought
in his mind. His letters to Violet were full of it. The history was so
romantic—so extraordinary, and yet so true—that it took strong hold
upon his imagination.
</p>

<p>
He looked forward with pleasure to his approaching visit to Stirmingham. Like
all men with any pretence to brains, though he delighted in Nature and loved
the country, there was a strong, almost irresistible, desire within him to
mingle in the vast crowds of cities, to feel that indefinable
“life” which animates the mass. A great city to such a man as Aymer
was like a wonderful book—an Arabian Night’s tale, an endless
romance which would afford inexhaustible pleasure in the study of its
characteristics.
</p>

<p>
Though it would involve at least a month’s absence from Violet, he looked
forward to the visit with impatience—not without a secret hope that he
might in some unexpected manner find a chance of rising in the scale, and
getting a little nearer to the object of his life.
</p>

<p>
He had a number of commissions to execute for Lady Lechester—particularly
one. This was to search the old bookstalls and the curiosity shops, in
out-of-the-way corners, for antique Bibles. Agnes had a weakness, if it may be
so-called, for collecting old editions of the Bible, and possessed a large and
extremely interesting library filled with them. One or two particularly rare
copies had hitherto escaped her search, and if there was such a thing to be
found in Stirmingham she felt sure that Aymer would be precisely the man to
find it.
</p>

<p>
He had also a commission to purchase for her a few pictures, with which to
decorate the walls of a new wing she was adding to The Towers. She had a
curious dislike to the old family mansion, and yet wished to live in the
neighbourhood from a sense of duty. She held it as a doctrine that the owners
of large estates should pass a part of their time, at all events, at
home—there were so many ways in which they could do good, not only by
charity, but by encouraging local industries.
</p>

<p>
The new wing was being built to enable her to reside at home, and yet gratify
the innate dislike to The Towers which she cherished. Aymer’s artistic
taste was so marked that she felt confident he would select her suitable
pictures. There were plenty of old paintings in the galleries of The Towers
which could have been spared for the new wing, but she preferred to be
surrounded with fresh objects, even down to the very footstool.
</p>

<p>
The day for the assembling of the great family council came nearer and nearer,
and the letters from Anthony Baskelette more frequent. The daily papers, which
Aymer saw now and read with the closest attention, began to devote a space to
notes upon the preparations, and some sent specials to Stirmingham in advance,
who described the city in a series of sketches, which excited Aymer’s
curiosity to the highest pitch.
</p>

<p>
News came at last that the claimants were assembling at Imola; then the date of
the sailing of the <i>Lucca</i> came and passed. They knew that she must sail
upon that day, because her owners were under contract to deliver the bullion
entrusted to them on a fixed date in London, where its approaching arrival had
already had an appreciable effect upon the money-market. Seven hundred thousand
pounds in coin, in gold bars and Mexican dollars, is a sum which cannot be
transferred from one country to another at once, without causing some
fluctuations upon the Exchange. The owners of the <i>Lucca</i> were under a
bond by which they forfeited a heavy sum if the vessel did not start to time.
Therefore there was no doubt that the <i>Lucca</i> had sailed, though no
announcement had reached London of the event, for it happened that the Atlantic
cables were out of order, and there were not then such a number of cables as at
present. Still, no one doubted for an instant that she was upon the seas; and
one well-known illustrated paper announced that a special artist of theirs was
on board, who, the moment he landed, would present the public with sketches of
the incidents of the voyage, portraits of the claimants, and other subjects of
interest. It was also generally understood that the heir, in his yacht, had
started from New York to accompany the steamer.
</p>

<p>
What was Aymer’s surprise and regret, upon opening the paper on the
second morning after, to see the following telegram, one of the cables having
got into partial working order again:—
</p>

<p class="letter">
“New York, Tuesday Night.<br />
    “The <i>Lucca</i> sailed on Friday at noon, but <i>without</i> the
claimants. She brings the specie announced.”
</p>

<p>
Then there was an editorial note to the effect that several other words of the
telegram could not be read, on account of the unsatisfactory state of the
wires. The evening papers had further particulars:—
</p>

<p class="letter">
“The <i>Lucca</i>, and the yacht of John Marese Baskette, Esq, have
passed Sandy Hook. All well. A snow-storm blocked the line from Imola to New
York, and the claimants could not arrive in time. They follow per
<i>Saskatchewan</i>.”
</p>

<p>
Next day additional particulars came to hand. It appeared that the heir,
Marese, had on the Wednesday gone to Imola, and received an ovation from the
assembled claimants. He was to accompany them to New York on the Friday, and to
follow the <i>Lucca</i> in his yacht. On Thursday night there came a heavy fall
of snow—and a strong wind, which caused immense drifts. Notwithstanding
these the special train, with Marese and one hundred and fifty claimants,
started from Imola with a pilot-engine in front, the station-masters along the
line having telegraphed that they would clear it in time. They did partially
succeed in the attempt; but the storm came on again, the wires were blown down;
and telegraphic communication for a part of the way interrupted.
</p>

<p>
In the thick snow the special crept along, with the pilot in front; but,
despite of all their caution, the pilot-engine ran into a drift and stuck fast.
The special came up, but there was no collision. To proceed was, however,
impossible; every moment made it more so, and they began to fear lest the
return to Imola should be also blocked up.
</p>

<p>
After much consultation it was decided to run back to Imola, and proceed by a
more circuitous route. There was just a chance that, if this other route was
clear of snow, they might get to New York in time. They put on steam and pushed
as fast as possible, and the consequence was a narrow escape from a serious
disaster. The wind, since they had passed, had blown down a large pine tree,
which fell across the line. The engine of the special struck this tree, but
being provided with cow-guards, was not thrown off the line. Some of the
machinery was, however, damaged, and the special came to a standstill. After a
long delay, consequent on the interruption of telegraphic communication, a
second train was sent up, and the passengers re-embarked in it, and at last got
back to Imola. It was now, however, too late to reach New York in time,
especially as the longer route was equally encumbered with drifts of snow. The
result was that the <i>Lucca</i> was obliged to start without them.
</p>







<h3>Twelve.</h3>

<p>
The <i>Saskatchewan</i> was to start on the next Friday. The claimants had
arrived at New York on the Sunday, after much trouble and a long journey,
having to make an immense détour. The council could not now hold its
first meeting on New Year’s Day, but was expected to assemble on the 6th
January (Twelfth Day).
</p>

<p>
For two days they were without intelligence at Barnham and Stirmingham, the
cables being wrong again, but on the third Aymer was sent for to the private
residence of Mr Broughton at seven in the morning. The London dailies had not
yet arrived, but he had received a private telegram from Shaw, Shaw, and
Simson, with the most extraordinary news. The yacht of Mr Marese Baskette had
brought the steamship <i>Lucca</i> back to port a derelict, having found her
helpless on the high seas, with every passenger and every one of the crew dead.
</p>

<p>
Presently the papers came and contained the same announcement, though they one
and all expressed a strong doubt as to the accuracy of the news. By-and-by down
came a second edition of the <i>Telegraph</i>, repeating the former telegram,
with additional particulars. By night it was known as a fact over the length
and breadth of the world, that the <i>Lucca</i> had been found lying like a log
upon the waste of waters with a crew of corpses—a veritable ship of the
Dead. The ghastly news was only too true. Excitement rose to the highest pitch;
edition after edition of the papers sold out; men congregated in groups,
discussing this new horror which had saddened civilisation. All were completely
in the dark as to how it had happened, and in the eagerness for further insight
the brief telegram announcing that the claimants had started on board the
<i>Saskatchewan</i> was overlooked. There were plenty, however, who pointed out
to each other the fortunate escape the claimants had had. If the snow had not
fallen on that particular night; if the wires had not been broken by the
falling posts; if the pine tree had fallen on one side instead of crossing the
line, they would in all human probability have one and all shared the fate of
those on board the <i>Lucca</i>.
</p>

<p>
Only one circumstance caused any abatement of the intense alarm which this
fearful occurrence created. It was this: The greater portion of the space
allotted for passenger accommodation on the <i>Lucca</i> had been taken by
Marese for the claimants, and as it was not certain up to the last moment
whether they would come or not, the ship started with less than a third of her
full complement of passengers. There was not, therefore, such a death-roll as
might have been; but, even as it was, it was extended enough.
</p>

<p>
No one could understand how it had happened; not the slightest explanation was
given, and the public mind was exercised in speculating upon the cause of the
disaster. The passage from America to England had long lost the character of a
voyage. The height to which perfection had been carried in the great steamship
lines, was such that it had become a mere ocean promenade. No one thought of
danger; the perils of the deep had been so thoroughly overcome. In the midst of
this security came a shattering blow, which dispelled the confidence slowly
built up by such an expenditure of skill and money as had perhaps never been
equalled in the history of the world. The mystery seemed impenetrable. If the
vessel had disappeared like the <i>City of Boston</i>; if it had sunk, there
would have been several explanations possible. But to be brought back into port
perfect, uninjured, and yet a derelict, with a dead crew—it was
inexplicable.
</p>

<p>
The <i>Saskatchewan</i> arrived on the 2nd January, and with her came the
claimants—all but Marese—and these immediately proceeded to
Stirmingham. It was hoped that she would have brought fuller particulars as to
the fate of the <i>Lucca</i>; but having started on the very day that the
<i>Lucca</i> returned to port, nothing more was known on board than the simple
fact.
</p>

<p>
On the 4th, however, another steamer came into Liverpool, bringing the New York
papers up to date, and the contents of these were at once published in London.
</p>

<p>
By the steamer came a letter from Anthony Baskelette. He had left the
<i>Saskatchewan</i> on hearing of the <i>Lucca’s</i> return, in great
anxiety about some consignment he had made by her to his agent in Stirmingham.
He had met the heir, and had been invited to accompany him to England on board
his yacht, which would not reach Liverpool till the 9th. He was full of the
<i>Lucca</i> catastrophe, and his long letter contained more particulars than
four papers.
</p>

<p>
Aymer read it with the deepest interest. It ran:—
</p>

<p>
“You will of course attend the council on the 6th, both in the interest
of the building society and of myself. I am delayed by the necessity of seeing
after the consignment I had made on board the unfortunate <i>Lucca</i>, which
consignment is too valuable to be left to agents. I am in the greatest anxiety,
because it is uncertain yet in what light the rescue of the <i>Lucca</i> will
be regarded.
</p>

<p>
“There can be no doubt that if the owner of the yacht—Mr Marese
Baskette—likes, he can put in a heavy claim for salvage. The question
is—whether in his position as the ostensible heir, and as a gentleman, he
will insist upon his right, or, at all events, moderate his demands?
</p>

<p>
“I have met and conversed with him, and I gather from him that personally
he is averse to making any claim at all. He considers that his yacht simply
performed a duly, and a duly that was imperative upon her captain. To take
money from those unfortunate persons who had consigned goods, or bullion in the
<i>Lucca</i> he thought would be contrary to every sentiment of honour and
humanity.
</p>

<p>
“But, unfortunately, he is not altogether a free agent. It appears that
at the time when the salvage of the <i>Lucca</i> was effected, there was on
board the yacht a certain Mr Theodore Marese—a cousin of Mr
Baskette’s, who is only in moderate circumstances, and naturally looks
upon the event as a windfall which may never occur again—as I hope and
pray it never will.
</p>

<p>
“Mr Theodore Marese, it seems, performed some personal service in
rescuing the <i>Lucca</i>, and was considered to have run considerable risk to
his life.
</p>

<p>
“A certain sum will have no doubt to be paid to Mr Theodore, and I cannot
blame him if he insists upon his right. He was practically the master of the
yacht at the time, and it seems was on his way—with Mr Baskette’s
permission—to London, to attend to some very urgent business there, which
the catastrophe of the <i>Lucca</i> has delayed and greatly injured, causing
him pecuniary loss.
</p>

<p>
“Then there is the captain of the yacht, and the crew. It is a fine
vessel—some 300 tons or more, I should think—a screw steamer, and
very fast. She carries a rather numerous crew, and all these are ravenous for
plunder, and it is hard to see how these claims are to be avoided. Still
further, it seems that Mr Baskette himself is not altogether a free agent. He
freely admitted to me that he was not without his debts—as is probable
enough to a man of fashion, with a certain position to maintain.
</p>

<p>
“These creditors may take advantage of the <i>Lucca</i> business to push
him, and say that he must take the salvage in order to meet their demands. Of
this he is greatly afraid.
</p>

<p>
“Baskette is a most pleasant man, easy to converse with, very open and
straightforward—quite a different person to what I should have expected.
He has been particularly agreeable to me, promising his best efforts to curtail
my loss, and has given me a cabin in his now famous yacht, the <i>Gloire de
Dijon</i>.
</p>

<p>
“I cannot drive the subject of the salvage from my mind. The saloons,
bars, hotels—everywhere people talk of nothing else. It has quite
eclipsed the tragedy, as well it might, from the magnitude of the sums
involved.
</p>

<p>
“First of all, there is the vessel herself—found upon the high
seas, a derelict, without a hand at the wheel or at the engines. She is a
splendid steamer, fully 3000 tons, and estimated at half a million of dollars,
or, say, 100,000 pounds. The cargo she carried was immensely valuable—the
bullion you know about: it was 718,000 pounds in exact figures—but the
cargo must be worth at least another 75,000 pounds.
</p>

<p>
“Then there is a very large amount of personal property, for half the
claimants who were to go by her had forwarded their luggage previously; and
there are the effects of the poor creatures who died. But these last, Mr
Baskette declares, shall under no circumstances be touched. Happen what may,
they are to be returned to the owners of their heirs undiminished.
</p>

<p>
“Putting it all at the lowest estimate, the value of the vessel, the
bullion, and cargo cannot be less than 893,000 pounds; and the salvage will
equal a gigantic fortune.
</p>

<p>
“So far I have dealt only with the salvage question. I will now proceed
to give you a more detailed account than you will be able to get from the
papers, of the terrible fate which overtook the <i>Lucca</i>. These I have
learnt from Mr Baskette and from Mr Theodore Marese, who was on the yacht.
</p>

<p>
“The reporters are, of course, incessant in their inquiries, but there is
much that has escaped them, as a certain amount of reticence must of necessity
be observed. These gentlemen have, however, made no reserve to me—I must
beg of you not to publish this letter, or any part of it, lest there should
appear to be a breach of confidence.
</p>

<p>
“It appears that the <i>Lucca</i> started at noon on the Friday, as per
bond, with a full complement of crew, but a short list of passengers. About two
hours after she had left, the <i>Gloire de Dijon</i> put out to sea. Mr
Baskette was at that time still at Imola, unable to get to New York. He and his
cousin, Mr T. Marese, were to have gone together in the yacht to London, where
Mr Theodore’s business was very pressing.
</p>

<p>
“When Mr Baskette found himself unable to reach New York, he telegraphed
to Mr Theodore telling him to take the yacht and go on to London as had been
previously arranged, thereby showing the same character of consideration for
others which he has since exhibited to me.
</p>

<p>
“Mr Theodore put to sea in the <i>Gloire de Dijon</i>, and says that next
morning they overtook the <i>Lucca</i>, or nearly so, the yacht being extremely
swift. It occurred to him that, after all, as the Atlantic is still the
Atlantic, notwithstanding steam, and there are such things as breaking
machinery, it would be well to keep in company with a powerful vessel like the
<i>Lucca</i> as far as the coast of Ireland.
</p>

<p>
“They did so, and even once spoke the steamship, which replied,
‘All well.’ All that day the two ships were not half a mile apart,
and the night being moonlit, the <i>Gloire de Dijon</i> followed close in the
other’s wake till about four in the morning, when, as often happens at
thick fog came on. Afraid of collision, the captain of the yacht now slackened
speed to about six knots, and kept a course a little to the starboard of the
steamer ahead.
</p>

<p>
“The fog continued very thick till past noon, and then suddenly lifted,
and they saw seven or eight sail in sight, one of which was the <i>Lucca</i> on
their port bow, and about four miles off. She was running, as usual, at a good
pace, and the sea being quiet, was making all thirteen knots. The <i>Gloire de
Dijon</i> increased speed, and drew up to within a mile and a half by three in
the afternoon. The <i>Lucca</i> then bore due east, and they were in her wake.
The wind was west, with a little southerly, and just ahead of the <i>Lucca</i>
was a large square-rigged ship, with all sail set, but making very little way
on account of the trifling breeze.
</p>

<p>
“An extraordinary thing now happened. The <i>Lucca</i> was observed by
the captain of the yacht to be making straight for the sailing ship ahead, and
had now got so close that a collision appeared inevitable. He called to Mr
Theodore, who came up from below. The <i>Lucca</i> ran dead at the sailing
ship, though she was making thirteen knots to the other’s four, and the
slightest turn of her wheel would have carried her free. On account of the
direction of the wind, the ship was sailing almost right before it, and the
steamer appeared to be aiming at her stern.
</p>

<p>
“On the yacht they could see the crew of the sailing ship making frantic
signs over the quarter to the steamer, but not the slightest notice was taken.
The captain of the sailing ship had relied upon the steamer giving way, as is
usual, and had allowed her to come so close that, it seems, he lost his head.
Seeing this, the mate sang out to put the helm a-starboard, and run straight
before the wind. This was done, and only just in time, for the steamer actually
grazed her quarter, and carried away their boom. Knowing that the captain of
the <i>Lucca</i> was an old sailor, and a steady, experienced man, they were
astonished at this behaviour, especially as, without staying to inquire what
damage had been done, she kept on her course at still greater speed.
</p>

<p>
“The captain of the yacht now put on speed, being desirous of speaking
the steamer; but after an hour or two it was evident that the <i>Lucca</i> was
drawing ahead, and had increased her lead by at least a mile. They could not
understand this, as the yacht was notoriously faster, and it became evident
that the engineer of the <i>Lucca</i> must have got his safety-valve
screwed-down.
</p>

<p>
“Night, as every one knows, falls rapidly at this time of the year, and
the darkness was increased by the fog, which now came on again. During the
evening all their conversation was upon the <i>Lucca</i>. Surely she would not
keep up her speed in such a fog as this? The yacht had slackened, and was
doing, as before, about six knots.
</p>

<p>
“The night wore on, till about two o’clock, when the wind
freshened, and blew half a gale. At four the fog cleared, and the watch
reported that the <i>Lucca</i> was on their starboard quarter, a mile astern,
with her engines stopped. Mr Theodore was called, and came on deck. There lay
the steamer in the trough of the sea, rolling, heaving—so much so that
they wondered her sticks did not go. No smoke issued from her funnel, and the
steam-pipe gave no sign. The usual flag was flying, but no signal was shown in
answer to the <i>Gloire de Dijon’s</i> inquiry. There was no sail on her.
</p>

<p>
“It was at once evident that something was wrong, and Mr Theodore ordered
the yacht to be put about. They tried the signals, but, as I said, no notice
was taken. On approaching the <i>Lucca</i>, which had to be done with some
caution, as she slewed about in a helpless manner, and was drifting before the
sea, an extraordinary spectacle presented itself. As she rolled, her deck came
partly into view, and they saw, with what feelings may be imagined, several men
lying on the deck, and thrown now this way, now that, as the rollers went under
her, evidently either dead or unconscious.
</p>

<p>
“Filled with alarm and excitement, they attempted to board the vessel,
but found it impossible. The waves made all but a clean breach over her. She
staggered like a drunken man, and swung now this way, now that. Some of the
standing rigging had given way, and they could hear the masts creak. They were
afraid to get under her lee in case they should fall.
</p>

<p>
“At length the captain of the yacht thought of a plan. He got a hawser
ready with a loop, and watching his opportunity, ran the yacht close to her
bow, and with his own hand, at great risk, hurled the rope, and by good luck
the loop caught in the fluke of one of her anchors. They paid the hawser out
over the yacht’s stern, and gradually got her in tow. It strained
fearfully; but as soon as they had got the <i>Lucca</i> before the wind, they
had her right enough, though there was even then some danger of being pooped.
The sea was high, but not so high that the jolly-boat could live, and they
manned her and boarded the <i>Lucca</i>.
</p>

<p>
“The sailors were eager enough to get on board, but so soon as they were
on deck the superstition of the sea seemed to seize them, and not one would
venture from the gangway; for towards the stern there lay the bodies that they
had seen, still and motionless, and evidently dead.
</p>

<p>
“A terrible mystery hung over the ship—terrible, indeed!”
</p>







<h3>Thirteen.</h3>

<p>
“Not one of the seamen could be got to go below, or to approach the
corpses on the deck; and even the mate, who did touch these last, had a
reluctance to descend. It was, however, necessary to get another hawser
attached to the <i>Lucca</i>, and this occupied some little time; and by then
the men became more accustomed to the ship, and at last, led by the mate, they
went down.
</p>

<p>
“At the foot of the staircase a terrible sight met their gaze. A heap of
people—seamen, passengers, all classes—lay huddled up
together—dead. They were piled one over the other in ghastly profusion,
having been probably flung about by the rolling of the ship when she got
broadside on. So great was the heap that they could not advance without either
stepping upon the bodies, or removing them; and in this emergency they
signalled to the yacht, which sent another boat, and in it came Mr Theodore.
</p>

<p>
“He at once gave orders to make a passage and to explore the steamer
thoroughly, which was done, and done speedily, for the sailors, having now
conquered their superstitious fears, worked with a will. From that heap
thirty-five bodies were carried up on deck, and laid upon one side in an awful
row. They exhibited no traces of violence whatever. Their faces were quite
calm; though one or two had the eyeballs staring from the head, as if they had
struggled to escape suffocation.
</p>

<p>
“A search through the steamer revealed a cargo of the dead. Passengers
lay at the doors of their berths, some half-dressed; and five or six were
discovered in their berths, having evidently died while asleep. The engineer
lay on the floor of the engine-room with three assistants—stiff, and with
features grimly distorted. They had apparently suffered more than the rest.
</p>

<p>
“The crew were found in various places. The captain lay near the
engine-room, as if he had been on his way to consult with the engineer when
death overtook him. Bodies were found all over the ship, and exclamations
constantly arose as the men discovered fresh corpses. The air between decks was
close and confined, and there was a fetid odour which they supposed to arise
from the bodies, and which forced them sometimes to run on deck to breathe.
This odour caused many of the sailors to vomit, and one or two were really ill
for a time.
</p>

<p>
“It appeared that the whole ship’s crew and all the passengers had
perished; but one of the sailors searching about found a man in the wheelhouse
on deck, who on being lifted up showed some slight trace of life. The sailors
crowded round, and the excitement was intense. Mr Theodore, who is a physician
by profession, lent the aid of his skill, and after a while the man began to
come round, though unable to speak.
</p>

<p>
“The captain of the yacht had now come on board, and a consultation was
held, at which it was decided to run back to New York. But as the wind was
strong and the sea high, and the hawsers strained a good deal, it was arranged
to put a part of the crew of the yacht on board the <i>Lucca</i>, to get up
steam in her boilers, and shape a course for the States. To this the crew of
the yacht strongly objected—they came aft in a body and respectfully
begged not to be asked to stay on board the <i>Lucca</i>. They dreaded a
similar fate to that which befel the crew and passengers of that unfortunate
steamer.
</p>

<p>
“The end of it was that Mr Theodore ordered the hawsers to be kept
attached, and the yacht was to partly tow the steamer and she was to partly
steam ahead herself—the steam was to be got up, and the engines driven at
half speed. This would ease the hawsers and the yacht, and at the same time the
crew on board the <i>Lucca</i> would be in communication with the yacht, and
able to convey their wishes at once.
</p>

<p>
“All agreed to this. Steam was easily got up, and the
<i>Lucca’s</i> boilers and her engines were soon working, for the
machinery was found to be in perfect order. By the time that this arrangement
was perfected, and the ships were, got well under weigh, the short day was
nearly over, and with the night came anew the superstitions of the sailors.
They murmured, and demurred to working a ship with a whole cargo of dead
bodies. They would not move even across the deck alone, and as to going below
it required them at once to face the mystery.
</p>

<p>
“After an hour or so a clamour arose to pitch the dead overboard. What on
earth was the use of keeping them? An abominable stench came up from between
decks, and many of them could barely stand it. Mr Theodore and the captain
begged them to be calm, but it was in vain. They rose <i>en masse</i>, and in a
short space of time every one of these dead bodies had been heaved overboard.
</p>

<p>
“The gale had moderated, and the splash of each corpse as it fell into
the water could be distinctly heard on board the yacht ahead. Such conduct
cannot be too much deplored, and there was a talk of prosecuting the men for
mutiny; but, on the other hand, there appears to be some excuse in the
extraordinary and unprecedented horrors of the situation.
</p>

<p>
“Mr Theodore remained on board the <i>Lucca</i>, doing all that science
and patience could do for the sole survivor, who proved to be the third
officer. Towards sunrise he rallied considerably, but Mr Theodore never had any
hopes, and advised the captain to take a note of his depositions, which was
done.
</p>

<p>
“His name, he said, was William Burrows, of Maine. He could only speak a
few sentences at a time, and that very faintly, but the substance of it was
that all went well with the <i>Lucca</i> up till early that morning, when first
the fog came on. Very soon after the mist settled down, and speed was reduced,
there was a commotion below, and a report spread through the ship that three
men were dying. In ten minutes half a dozen more were taken in this manner.
They complained merely of inability to breathe, and of a deadly weakness, and
prayed to be taken on deck. This was done; but then ten or twelve more were
affected, and those who went below to assist them up on deck fell victims at
once to the same strange disorder. Every one throughout the ship complained of
a faint, sickly odour, and no sooner was this inhaled than a deadly lethargy
seized upon them, and increased till they fell down and died. He happened to be
on deck in the wheelhouse at the time, and saw half a dozen sailors and three
of the passengers brought up, but remembered no more, for the sickly smell
invaded the deck. He heard a singing in his ears, and the blood seemed to press
heavily, as if driven upwards against the roof of his skull. He remembered no
more for some hours. Then he, as it were, awoke, and got up on his legs, but
again felt the same lethargy, and fell. When the disorder first attacked the
ship’s company, the captain talked of stopping the steamer and signalling
for assistance; but it appeared to be useless, for the fog was so thick that
any flag, or rocket, or light would have been unnoticed at half a cable’s
distance. Preparations were made to fire a gun, and the steam blast was
ordered, but the engineer was dead, and no one would go below. The captain then
descended to go to the engine-room, and was seen no more. Meantime the steamer
continued her way. When he got on his legs in the wheelhouse, it was just after
the bow of the <i>Lucca</i> had carried away the boom of an unknown sailing
ship, and he could feel that she was then going at a tremendous speed. The fog
had cleared, and if he had had strength enough he could have made signals, but
the deadly sleep came over him again, and he was unconscious till picked up by
the crew of the <i>Gloire de Dijon</i>.
</p>

<p>
“This was all he could tell, and it threw no light upon the cause of the
disaster. After he had signed this in a shaky hand—I have seen the
original document—he sank rapidly, and, despite of every remedy and
stimulant, died before noon. His body was the only one brought into port, and
it was interred yesterday in the presence of a vast assembly. A
<i>post-mortem</i> examination failed to detect the slightest trace of poison
or indication of disease; and all those who assisted in removing the dead
bodies on board the <i>Lucca</i>, declare that they presented no known symptoms
of any epidemic—for the prevailing belief in New York at first was that
some epidemic had broken out—a kind of plague, which destroyed its
victims almost as soon as attacked. But for this there seems no foundation
whatever. None of the sailors of the yacht caught the epidemic. One or two were
unwell for a day or so, but are now well and hearty.
</p>

<p>
“I think Mr Theodore’s suggestion the best that has been
made—and it gradually gains ground with educated men, though the mass
cling to the fanciful notion of foul play in some unheard-of way—Mr
Theodore thinks that it was caused by the generation of coal-damp, or some
similar and fatal gas, in the coal-bunkers of the <i>Lucca</i>; and everything
seems to favour this supposition. It is well-known that in cold
weather—especially in cold weather accompanied by fog—coal-damp in
mines is especially active and fatal. Most of the great explosions which have
destroyed hundreds at once have occurred in such a state of the atmosphere.
</p>

<p>
“Now the fog which came on that fatal morning was peculiarly thick and
heavy, and it so happens that the coal in the <i>Lucca’s</i> bunkers came
from a colliery where, only a fortnight ago, there was an explosion. The
vapour, or gas, or whatever it was that was thus generated, was not the true
coal-damp, or it would have been ignited by the furnaces of the boilers, or at
the cook’s fires; but in all probability it was something very near akin
to it. All the symptoms described by poor Burrows, are those of blood-poisoning
combined with suffocation, and such would be the effects of a gas or vapour
arising from coal. Fatal effects arising from damp coal in close bunkers are on
record; but this is the worst ever heard of.
</p>

<p>
“It would seem that after the engineer and the crew fell into their fatal
slumbers, the steam in the boilers must have reached almost a bursting
pressure—the boilers being untended—and the engineer, in falling,
had opened the valve to the full, which accounts for the extraordinary speed of
the <i>Lucca</i> when pursued by the yacht. Being a very long vessel and sharp
in the bows, and going at a very high speed, she would naturally keep nearly a
direct course, as there was little wind or sea to interfere with her rudder. So
soon as the fires burned out the engines stopped, and the sea rising, she
became entirely at the mercy of the waves.
</p>

<p>
“When Burrows fell a victim he saw nine or ten men on deck lying prone in
a fatal sleep—when the <i>Gloire de Dijon</i> sent a boat’s crew on
board there were but three bodies on deck; the rest had rolled, or been washed,
overboard.
</p>

<p>
“These are the principal particulars of this unprecedented catastrophe.
This is a long letter, but I am sure that you will be eager for news upon the
subject, and, to tell the truth, I cannot get it out of my mind, and it
relieves me to write it down.
</p>

<p>
“What a narrow escape we have all had. And especially me, for I came on
to New York from Imola before the rest started, and got clear through without
any snow. When it was found that they could not reach New York in time, I was
in doubt whether to go by the <i>Lucca</i>, or remain and accompany the main
body in the <i>Saskatchewan</i>. Accident decided. I met an old friend whom I
had not seen for years, and resolved to take advantage of the delay, and spend
a day or two with him. So I escaped.
</p>

<p>
“But had it not been for the snow-storm, which caused so much cursing at
the time, we should one and all have perished miserably. The impression made
upon us was so deep that just before the <i>Saskatchewan</i> started the whole
body of the claimants attended a special service at a church here, when
thanksgivings were offered for the escape they had had, and prayers offered up
for future safety.
</p>

<p>
“I look forward with much pleasure to my voyage in the <i>Gloire de
Dijon</i> yacht, at Mr Baskette’s invitation. A finer, more gentlemanly
man does not exist; and I am greatly impressed with the learning of Mr
Theodore.”
</p>

<p>
Aymer was much struck with the contents of this letter of Anthony
Baskelette’s. The whole tragedy seemed to pass before his mind; his vivid
imagination called up a picture of the <i>Lucca</i>, steaming as fast as
bursting pressure could drive her with a crew of corpses across the winter sea.
He made an extract from it, and sent it to Violet. Next day they were <i>en
route</i> for Stirmingham.
</p>

<p>
At the same moment the designer of this horrible event was steaming across the
Atlantic in his splendid yacht, gulling weak-minded, simple Baskelette with
highest notions of honour, and what not. When Marese found that the snow had
blocked the line and prevented access to New York, his rage and disappointment
knew no bounds; but he was sufficiently master of himself to think and decide
upon the course to be pursued.
</p>

<p>
Although that part of the diabolical scheme which aimed at the wholesale
destruction of the claimants had failed, all the other sections of it were in
train to succeed. The bullion was shipped, the cargo a rich one, the steamer
herself valuable—no better prize could ever fall to him. Therefore he
telegraphed to Theodore in cypher to proceed as had been arranged.
</p>

<p>
The infernal machine, concealed in the simple aspect of an ordinary strong
deal-box, was sent on board the <i>Lucca</i>, and everything happened just as
Theodore had foreseen. If the conspirators were somewhat disturbed in their
calculations by the snow-storm, on the other hand their designs were assisted
by the heavy fog which had occurred at sea. Undoubtedly this fog rendered the
poisonous gas escaping from the case still more effective, as it would prevent
it dispersing so rapidly, and at the same time it hid any signals the
<i>Lucca</i> might have made.
</p>

<p>
Nothing more fortunate for the conspirators than this fog could have happened,
for its service did not end here—it furnished a plausible explanation of
what would have otherwise been inexplicable.
</p>

<p>
Theodore easily contrived the removal of the fatal case, now empty, on board
the <i>Gloire de Dijon</i> after the <i>Lucca</i> had returned to port. The
case had been consigned to Liverpool, which was the port the <i>Lucca</i> was
bound for, and the excuse for sending it by the <i>Lucca</i> was all cut and
dried—i.e., that the <i>Gloire de Dijon</i> was for London.
</p>

<p>
Nothing was more natural than that, after this narrow escape, it should be
wished to transfer the case to the <i>Gloire de Dijon</i>. This was done; and
while at sea Theodore quietly removed his machine and pitched it into the water
at night, and it sank in the abyss, being lined with iron inside.
</p>

<p>
The question of salvage bid fair to occupy the Courts in New York for some
considerable time, and to be a boon to the lawyers; but the two conspirators
were far too keen to let their prize slip from them in that way. They managed
to have the matter referred to arbitration, and the final result was that
400,000 pounds was awarded. This amount they at once transferred to London, and
with it plunged at once into fresh schemes.
</p>







<h3>Fourteen.</h3>

<p>
The great city whose ownership was at stake, knew that the eagles were gathered
to the living carcase, and yet did not feel their presence. What are one
hundred and fifty people in a population of half a million? They are lost,
unless they march in order and attract attention by blocking up the streets.
Disband a regiment of the Line in Saint Paul’s Churchyard at London, and
in ten minutes it would disappear, and no one would notice any unusual
prevalence of red coats on the pavements.
</p>

<p>
The newspaper people were woefully disappointed, for the Press were not
admitted. They revenged themselves with caricature portraits of the claimants,
and grotesque sketches of their manners and conduct. Although the Press were
excluded; there were several present who could write shorthand, and amongst
these was a clerk from the office of Shaw, Shaw, and Simson, whose notes I have
had the opportunity of consulting.
</p>

<p>
The Sternhold Hall, in which the council was held, was built, as has been
stated, upon a spot once the very centre of the Swamp, now surrounded with
noble streets of mansions and club-houses, theatres,
picture-galleries—the social centre of Stirmingham. The front—you
can buy a photograph of it for a shilling—is of the Ionic order of
architecture—that is, the modern mock Ionic—i.e., the basement is
supported by columns of that order, and above these the <i>façade</i>
consists of windows in the Gothic style, which are, after all, dumb windows
only. The guide-books call it magnificent; it is really simply incongruous.
</p>

<p>
The whole of the first two days was spent by the one hundred and fifty
claimants in wrangling as to who should take the chair, how the business should
be conducted, who should be admitted and who should not. All the minor
differences suppressed while on the voyage broke out afresh, the moment the
eagles had scented the carcase. Two days’ glimpse at the wealth of
Stirmingham, was sufficient to upset all the artificial calm and friendship,
which had been introduced by the generous offers of Marese Baskette. One
gentleman proposed that a certain section of claimants should be wholly
excluded from the hall. This caused a hubbub, and if the incident had happened
in the States revolvers might have been used. The Original Swampers declared
that they would not sit under a chairman drawn from any other body but
themselves. The outer circle of Baskettes considered that the conceit of the
Swampers was something unbearable, and declined to support them in any way. The
Illegitimate Swampers alone supported the Originals, in the hope of getting up
by clinging to their coat-tails. The Primitive Sibbolds were quite as
determined to sit under no president but their own, and, the ranks of the other
Sibbolds were split up into twenty parties. The clamour of tongues, the
excitement, the hubbub was astounding.
</p>

<p>
Aymer, as clerk to Mr Broughton, had a first-rate view of the whole, for Shaw,
Shaw, and Simson had provided for the comfort of their representative by
purchasing for the time the right to use the stage entrance of the room. Their
offices were for the nonce established in the green-room. Their clients mounted
upon the platform or stage, and passed behind the curtain to private
consultation. This astute management upset the other seven companies, whose
representatives had to locate themselves as best they might in the midst of a
stormy sea of contending people. From the rear of the stage, just where the
stage-manager was accustomed to look out upon the audience and watch the effect
upon them of the play, Aymer had a good view of the crowd below, and beheld men
in every shade of cloth, with rolls of paper, yellow deeds, or old books and
quill pens in their hands, gesticulating and chattering like the starlings at
World’s End.
</p>

<p>
For two whole days the storm continued, till at last Mr Broughton suggested
that the debate should be conducted in sections; each party to have its own
president, secretary, committee, and reporter of progress; each to sit apart
from the others by means of screens, and that there should be a central
committee-room, to receive the reports and tabulate them in order. This scheme
was adopted, and something like order began to prevail. Anthony Baskelette,
Esq, who had now arrived per the <i>Gloire de Dijon</i>, was pretty unanimously
voted to the presidentship of the central committee, or section, the members of
which were composed of representatives from every party. Screens were provided
at no little expense, and the great hall was portioned out into thirty or forty
pens, not unlike the high pews used of old in village churches.
</p>

<p>
Aymer was intensely interested and amused, as he stood at his peep-hole on the
stage, from which he could see into every one of these pens, or pews, and watch
the eagerness of the disputes going on between the actors in each.
</p>

<p>
The first great object the sections had in view was to reduce their claims to
something like shape and order; for this purpose each section was numbered from
1 to 37, and was to deliver to the central section, Number 38, a report or
summary of the general principles and facts upon which the members of the
section based their claim. This summary of claim, as it was called, was to be
short, succinct, and clear; and to be supported by minute extracts of evidence,
by the vouchers of the separate individuals, so to say, showing that the
summary was correct.
</p>

<p>
These extracts of evidence attached to the summary were really not extracts,
but full copies, and had to contain the dates, names, method of identification,
and references to church registers, tombstones, family Bibles, and so forth.
</p>

<p>
Aymer was astounded at the magnitude of these volumes of evidence—for
such, in fact, they were. He had an opportunity of just glancing at them, as
they were laid upon the table of the central section one after another. The
summaries were reasonable and tolerably well expressed. The minutes of evidence
were something overwhelming. A section would send up in the course of a
day—first, its summary and a pile of folios—seventy or eighty large
lawyer’s folios of evidence to be attached to it. On the morrow it would
beg for permission to add to its evidence, and towards the afternoon up would
come another huge bundle of closely-written manuscript.
</p>

<p>
This would go on for several days, till the central committee at last issued an
order to receive no more evidence from section Number —.
</p>

<p>
Then section Number — would hold an indignation meeting and protest, till
the central committee was obliged to receive additional bundles of so-called
evidence. Half of this evidence was nothing better than personal recollection.
</p>

<p>
The method pursued in the sections was delightfully simple and gratifying to
every member’s vanity. He was supplied with pen and ink, and told to put
down all he could recollect about his family. The result was that in each
section there were five or six people—and in some more—all busily
at work, writing autobiographies; and as everybody considered himself of quite
as much consequence as his neighbour, the bulk of these autobiographies can
easily be imagined.
</p>

<p>
If any one had taken the trouble to wade through these personal histories, he
would have been highly gratified with the fertility of the United States in
breeding truly benevolent, upright, and distinguished men!
</p>

<p>
Out of all that one hundred and fifty there was not one who did not merit the
gratitude of his township at least, and some were fully worthy of the
President’s chair at the White House. Their labours for the good of
others were most carefully recorded—the subscriptions they had made to
local charities far away on the other side of the Atlantic, to schoolhouses,
and chapels, town-halls, and what not.
</p>

<p>
“There,” ran many a proud record,—“you will see my
initials upon the corner-stone—‘J.I.B.,’ for ‘Jonathan
Ithuriel Baskette,’ and the date (186-), which is in itself good evidence
towards my case.”
</p>

<p>
All this mass of rubbish had to be sifted by the central, committee, to be
docketed, indexed, arranged, and a general analysis made of it.
</p>

<p>
They worked for a while without a murmur, and suddenly collapsed. It was
impossible to meet the flood of writing. Fancy one hundred and fifty people
writing their autobiographies all at once, and each determined to do himself
justice! Such a spectacle was never witnessed since the world began, and was
worthy of the nineteenth century. The central committee flung up their hands in
despair. A resource was presently found in the printing-press.
</p>

<p>
When once the idea was started, the cry spread to all corners of the hall, and
rose in a volume of sound to be echoed from the roof. The Press! The Spirit
evoked by Faust which he could not control, nor any who have followed him.
</p>

<p>
It was unanimously decided that everything should be printed—sectional
summaries, minutes of evidence, central committees analysis, solicitors
arguments, references and all. There was rejoicing in the printing offices at
Stirmingham that day. Now the <i>Stirmingham Daily Post</i> reaped the reward
of its long attack upon the family of the heir, upon Sternhold Baskette, and
Marese, his son. The contract was offered to the <i>Daily Post</i>, the
<i>Daily Post</i> accepted it, and set to work, but soon found it necessary to
obtain the aid of other local printers.
</p>

<p>
Now a new source of delay and worry arose. The moment everybody knew they were
going into print—why is it print sounds so much better than
manuscript?—each and all wanted to revise and add to their histories.
First, all the sections had to receive back their summaries and minutes of
evidence, to be re-written, corrected, revised, and above all extended. The
scribbling of pens recommenced with redoubled vigour, and now the
printer’s devils appeared upon the scene. The cost of printing the
enormous mass of verbiage must have been something immense, but it was
cheerfully submitted to—because each man looked forward to the pleasure
of seeing himself in print.
</p>

<p>
Acres upon acres of proofs went in and out of the Sternhold Hall, and meantime
Aymer grew impatient and weary of it. His time was much more occupied than at
Barnham. He had to conduct all Broughton’s correspondence, and when that
was finished lend a hand in arranging the minutes of evidence for the
committee, who had applied for assistance to the solicitors. He had only
reckoned on a month at Stirmingham at the outside. Already a fortnight had
elapsed, and there seemed no sign of the end.
</p>

<p>
His letters to Violet became tinged with a species of dull despair. All this
scribbling was to him the very acme of misery, the very winter of
discontent—meaningless, insufferable. There was no progress in it for
him: he could not find a minute’s spare time now to proceed with his
private work. Not a step was gained nearer Violet.
</p>

<p>
When at last the scribbling was over; when the proofs had been read and re-read
and corrected till the compositors went mad; then the speechifying had to
begin. This to Aymer was even more wearisome than the other. For Mr Broughton
having discovered his literary talent, employed him to listen to the debate and
write a daily <i>précis</i> of its progress, which it would be less
trouble to him to read than the copious and interminable notes of the shorthand
writer.
</p>

<p>
This order compelled Aymer to pay close attention to every speech from first to
last; and as they one and all followed the American plan of writing out their
speeches and reading them, most were of inordinate length. To suit the speakers
a new arrangement of the hall had to be made. The screens were now removed, and
the sections placed in a kind of semi-circle, with the central section in
front. Those who desired to speak gave in their names, and were called upon by
the president in regular rotation.
</p>

<p>
The first subject discussed was the method to be pursued. Some recommended that
the whole body of claimants should combine and present their claims <i>en
masse</i>. Others thought that this plan might sacrifice those who had good
claims to those who had bad ones. Many were for forming a committee, chosen
from the various sections, to remain in England and instruct the solicitors;
others were for forming at once a committee of solicitors.
</p>

<p>
After four or five days of fierce discussion the subject was still unsettled,
and a new one occupied its place. This was—how should the plunder be
divided? Such a topic seemed to outsiders very much like reckoning the chickens
before they were hatched. But not so to these enthusiastic gentlemen. They were
certain of wresting the properly from the hands of the
“Britishers,” who had so long kept them out of their
rights—the Stars and Stripes would yet float over the city of
Stirmingham, and the President of the United States should be invited to a
grand dinner in that very hall!
</p>

<p>
The division of the property caused more dissension than everything else taken
together. One section—that of the Original Swampers—declared that
it <i>would</i> have, nothing should prevent its having, the whole of the
streets, etc, built on the site of the Swamp. The Sibbolds cared not a rap for
the Swamp; they <i>would</i> have all the property which had grown upon the
site of old Sibbold’s farm at Wolfs Glow. The Illegitimates claimed
pieces here and there, corresponding to the islands of the Swamp. Some one
proposed that the meeting should be provided with maps of Stirmingham, and the
idea was unanimously adopted.
</p>

<p>
Then came the day of the surveyors. One vast map was ordered—it had to be
made in sections—and was estimated to cover, when extended, a mile in
length by three hundred yards in breadth; and then it did not satisfy some of
the claimants. Then followed a terrible wrangle over the maps. Everybody wanted
to mark his possession upon it with red ink, and these red ink lines invariably
interfered with one another. One gentleman proposed, with true American
ingenuity, to have the map traced in squares—like the outlying
territories and backwoods of America—and to assign to each section a
square! But this was too equal a mode to satisfy the more grasping.
</p>

<p>
Finally, it was resolved that all the minutes of evidence should be gone
through by the central committee, and that they should sketch out those
portions of the city to which each section was entitled. This took some time.
At the end of that time the great Sternhold Hall presented an extraordinary
spectacle. The walls of the hall, from the ceiling to the floor, and all round,
and the very ceiling itself, were papered with these sections of the map, each
strongly marked with lines in red ink. Near the stage there was a vast library
of books, reaching half-way to the ceiling; this was composed of the summaries,
minutes of evidence, etc.
</p>

<p>
All round the room wandered the claimants in knots of two or three, examining
their claims as marked upon the sections of the map. Many had opera-glasses to
distinguish the claims which were “skyed;” some affected to lie
down on their backs and examine the ceiling with telescopes; scores had their
volume of evidence in their hands, and were trying to discover upon what
principle the central committee had apportioned out the city.
</p>

<p>
Of course there was a general outcry of dissatisfaction—one section had
too much, another too little, and some sections, it was contended, had no right
to any. The meeting then resolved that each section should visit the spaces
marked out for its claim, and should report to the central committee upon its
value. Away went the sections, and there might have been seen five or six
gentlemen in one street, and ten or twelve round the corner, with maps and
pencils, talking eagerly, and curiously scanning the shops and
houses—poking their noses into back courts and alleys—measuring the
frontage of club-houses and theatres. The result was an uproar, for each
section declared that the other had had a more valuable portion of the city
given to it; and one utterly rejected its section, for it had got the
Wolf’s Glow district—the lowest den in Stirmingham!
</p>

<p>
After a long discussion, it was at last arranged that each section should
retain, <i>pro tem</i>, its claim as marked out, and that <i>token the property
was realised</i>, any excess of one section over the other should be equally
divided. These people actually contemplated the possibility of putting the city
up to auction! To such lengths will the desire of wealth drive the astutest of
men, blinding their eyes to their own absurdity.
</p>

<p>
After these preliminary points were settled, the meeting at last resolved
itself into a committee of the whole house, and proceeded to business. The
first business was to verify the evidence. This necessitated visits to the
churches, and public record office to make extracts, etc, and two days were set
apart for that purpose. It was a rich harvest for the parish clerks of
Stirmingham, and especially for the fortunate clerk at Wolf’s Glow. After
this the meeting, beginning to be alarmed at the enormous expense it had
incurred, resolved on action, and with that object it decided to hold a secret
session, and to exclude all persons not strictly claimants.
</p>

<p>
This relieved Aymer from his wearisome task of chronicling the proceedings; but
he could not leave or get a day to visit Violet. As he left the hall he stopped
a moment to look at the stock-in-trade of an itinerant bookseller, who had
established his track in front of the building since the family congress began.
His stock was principally genealogical, antiquarian, and
topographical—mostly old rubbish, that no one would imagine to be worth a
sixpence, and yet which, among a certain class, commands a good sale.
</p>

<p>
The title of a more modern-looking volume caught Aymer’s eye. It was
“A Fortune for a Shilling,” and consisted of a list of unclaimed
estates, next of kin, persons advertised for, etc. He weighed it in his
hand—it tempted him; yet he despised himself for his weakness. But
Violet? He should serve her best by saving his shilling. He put it down, and
went his way.
</p>







<h3>Fifteen.</h3>

<p>
Their mouths watered for the great city, yet it seemed no nearer to them than
when three thousand miles away on the other side of the Atlantic. They talked
loudly of their rights, but there was the little difficulty of possession,
which is sometimes a trifle more than nine points of the law. I have conversed
with unreasonable members of a certain Church, which claims to be universal,
who considered that half England—half the vast domains owned by lords and
ladies, by the two hundred and fifty proprietors of Great Britain—was
really the property of the Church, if she had her rights.
</p>

<p>
There are those who consider that Algeria ought to belong to the Arabs, that
Africa belongs to the blacks, and India to the Hindoos. Sat there comes this
awkward item of possession. You have to buy the man in possession out, or else
pitch him out; and the difficulty in this case was that there were so many in
possession. Eight companies and a Corporation are not easily ejected.
</p>

<p>
The fact was, the grand family council was a farce, and fell through. Even as a
demonstration it completely failed. The members of it might just as well have
stayed at home, and sent a monster petition to the House of Lords, several
hundred yards long (as per the usual custom now-a-days), and their progress
would have been about as great.
</p>

<p>
The <i>Stirmingham Daily News</i>, which had published the life of Sternhold
Baskette, and defended his legitimate line, poured bitter satire upon it, and
held the whole business up to ridicule—as well it might. The <i>News</i>
was now Conservative. The intense self-conceit of the Yankees—to imagine
that they were going to quietly take possession of a great English city, and
hoist the Stars and Stripes on Saint George’s Cathedral at Stirmingham!
</p>

<p>
The American gentlemen fumed and fussed, and uttered threats of making the
Stirmingham claim a feature in the next Presidential election—it should
“leave the low sphere of personal contention, and enter the arena of
political discussion;” so they said. It should be a new <i>Alabama</i>
case; and if they could not have Stirmingham, they would have—the
Dollars!
</p>

<p>
Meantime the dollars disappeared rather rapidly, and, after a month or six
weeks of these endless wranglings in the Sternhold Hall, there began to be
symptoms of an early break-up. First, three or four, then ten, then a dozen,
crept off, and quietly sailed for New York, lighter in pocket, and looking
rather foolish. The body, however, of the claimants could not break up in that
ignominious manner. It was necessary for them to do something to mark the fact
that they had been there, at all events.
</p>

<p>
The final result was that they appointed a committee of solicitors—one
for each section that chose to be represented. Twenty-two sections did choose,
and twenty-two solicitors formed the English committee who were to promote the
claims of one hundred and fifty able-bodied Baskettes and Sibboldians, who
represented about three times that number of women and children. Then they held
a banquet in the Sternhold Hall, and invited the Mayor of Stirmingham, who,
however, was very busy that evening, and “deeply regretted” his
inability to be present. The council then broke up, and departed for New York.
</p>

<p>
Aymer was indeed glad; now he should be able to see Violet again, and resume
his book so long laid aside. But no; there came a new surprise. A certain
recalcitrant borough in the West returned unexpectedly a member of the wrong
colour to Parliament, and the House was dissolved, and writs were issued for a
general election. Three days afterwards an address appeared in the
<i>Stirmingham Daily News</i>, announcing Marese Baskette as a candidate for
that place in the Conservative interest. The heir had resolved to enter the
House if possible, and his proclamation fell on Stirmingham, not like a
thunderbolt, but like the very apple of discord dropped from heaven.
</p>

<p>
First, it upset poor Aymer’s little plans and hopes. The companies were
desperately alarmed, and not without reason; for if Marese got into Parliament
he would, no doubt, very quickly become in himself a power, and would be
supported by his party in his claim upon the building societies. It would be to
the interest of his party that he should obtain his property—it would be
so much substantial gain to them. Practically, Marese Baskette would have the
important borough of Stirmingham in his pocket; therefore the party would be
sure to do all they could to get his claim fully admitted. Imagine that party
in power; fancy the chief at the head of Government!
</p>

<p>
Every one knows that justice and equity are immaculate in England, and that no
strain is ever put upon them for political purposes, or to gratify political
supporters. The fact is so well understood, so patent, that it is unnecessary
to adduce any proof of it. But there is, nevertheless, a certain indefinite
feeling that the complexion of the political party in power extends very
widely, and penetrates into quarters supposed to be remote from its centre.
Whichever happens to be uppermost—but let us not even think such
treasonable things.
</p>

<p>
At all events the companies had a real dread—a heartfelt fear—lest
Marese Baskette should get into Parliament, and so obtain political support to
his claim. They had foreseen something of the kind; they had dreaded its
happening any time ever since he came of age; but they had reckoned that his
known poverty would keep him out, especially as there was a very popular
landlord in the county, Sir Jasper Norton, who, with another prominent
supporter of the Liberal Government, had hitherto proved invincible. It had
hung over their heads for years; now it had fallen, and fallen, of all other
times, just at the very moment when their leases were on the point of expiring.
A more unfortunate moment for them could not have been chosen. With one consent
they resolved to fight him tooth and nail. This was fatal to poor Aymer’s
hopes. For the company (Number 6) which employed Shaw, Shaw, and Simson could
not possibly spare Mr Broughton’s energetic spirit; he must help them
fight the coming man. Broughton, seeing good fees and some sport, resolved, to
stay, and with him poor Aymer had to remain.
</p>

<p>
The whole city was in a ferment. Marese Baskette’s name was upon every
lip, and as the murmur swelled into a roar it grew into something very like a
cheer for the heir. That cheer penetrated the thick walls of many a fashionable
villa and mansion, and was listened to with ill-concealed anxiety. Many a
portly gentleman, dressed in the tailor’s best, with broad shirt-front,
gold studs, and heavy ring, rubicund with good living, as he stood upon his
hearth-rug, with his back to the fire, in the midst of his family circle,
surrounded with luxury, grew thoughtful and absent as that dull distant roar
reached his ears. Banker and speculator, city man, merchant, ironworker,
coalowner, millowner, heard and trembled. For the first time they began to
comprehend the meaning of the word Mob.
</p>

<p>
That word is well understood in America; twice it has been thoroughly spelt and
learnt by heart in France. Will it ever be learnt in England? Outside those
thick walls and strong shutters in the dingy street or dimly-lit suburban road,
where the bitter winter wind drove the cold rain and sleet along, there roamed
abroad a mighty monster roused from his den. They heard and trembled. Before
that monster the safeguards of civilisation are as cobwebs. He may be scotched
with Horse Guards and Snider rifles, beaten back into his caverns; but of what
avail is that after the mischief is done? In sober earnest, the middle classes
began to fear for the safety of Stirmingham. You see, the grey sewer-rats had
undermined it from end to end!
</p>

<p>
It happened that the ironmasters and the coalowners, and some of the
millowners, had held out long and successfully against a mighty strike: a
strike that extended almost to a million of hearths and homes. They had won in
the struggle, but the mind of the monster was bitter against them. They were
Liberal—nearly all. Let them and their candidates keep a good look-out!
</p>

<p>
It happened also that the winter was hard and cold, work scarce, provisions
dear; everything was wrong. It is at such times that, in exact opposition to
all rules, the grey rat flourishes!
</p>

<p>
Finally, it happened that the party who had so strangely abdicated power just
at the time when they seemed so firmly fixed, had committed a singularly, an
exceptionally, unpopular act. They had robbed the poor man of his beer! They
had curtailed his hours for drinking it, and to all appearance in an arbitrary
way. Rumour said that they contemplated an alliance with the Cold Water
Pump—that horror of horrors, the Temperance party. They had robbed the
poor man of his beer! And the grey rat showed his teeth.
</p>

<p>
Marese Baskette issued his <i>pronunciamento</i>, and at once opened the
campaign. Everybody read it, from the club-house to the grimy bar of the lowest
public-house. The club-house smiled, and said, “Clever;” the
pot-house cheered, and cried, “He’s our man.” He <i>was</i>
their man. Even yet, at this distance of time, there lingered in the minds of
the populace a distinct recollection of the great saturnalia which had been
held in the days of old Sternhold Baskette, when their candidate was born.
</p>

<p>
History magnifies itself as time rolls on; the memory of that brief hour of
unlimited riot had grown till it remained the one green spot in the life of the
Stirmingham populace. This was the very man—this was the very infant
whose advent, almost a generation ago, had been celebrated with rejoicings such
as no king or queen in these degenerate days ever offered to the people.
</p>

<p>
When old Sternhold Baskette in the joy of his heart poured out wine in gallons,
spirits in casks, and beer in rivers, he baptised his son Marese, the Child of
the People. And it bore fruit at this great distance of time.
</p>

<p>
John Marese Baskette was, as we know, a clever man; he had a still more subtle
man at his elbow. Between them they composed his address and his first oration.
Be sure they did not forget the memory so dear to the people. Not one single
thing was omitted which could tend to identify Marese Baskette with the
populace. The combination of capital against them, the hard winter and price of
provisions, all were skilfully turned to advantage; and, above all, the beer.
When the publicans had read his address they one and all said,
“He’s our man.” Licensed victuallers, beer-house keepers,
“off the premises” men, gin-palace, eating-house, restaurant,
hotel—all joined hands and marched in chorus, praising the man who
promised to turn on the beer.
</p>

<p class="poem">
For he’s a jolly good fellow,<br />
And so say all of us!
</p>

<p>
But Marese Baskette did not wholly rely upon the poorer classes: he gained the
goodwill, or at least the neutrality, of two-thirds of the middle classes, by
openly declaring that when he came into his property, as he grandly designated
half the city, he should devote one-third of it to the relief of local
taxation, to form a kind of common fund for sewers, gas, water, poor-rates,
paving, etc. He went further—this he did not promulgate openly, but he
caused it to be spread industriously abroad from house to house—and said
that, when he inherited his rights, the house rents should be reduced from
their present exorbitant figure.
</p>

<p>
Now it was notorious that the companies only waited to see whether they could
tide over the year of expiration of their leases before they raised the rents.
The arrow therefore went home. Baskette had hit the nail upon the head. The
other party began to threaten petitions for bribery—contending that these
promises were nothing short of it.
</p>

<p>
The <i>Daily Post</i> published a leader on “Glaring Corruption and
Wholesale Venality.” Baskette and Theodore smiled. What would be the use
of unseating him if, as they clearly saw, the opposite party was gone to utter
destruction?
</p>

<p>
Baskette met with a triumphant reception at his first meeting. Whenever he
appeared in the streets he was cheered to the echo.
</p>

<p>
The building societies and the Corporation were desperately alarmed. Though so
bitterly opposed to each other at ordinary times, a common fear gave them
unity. They held a secret meeting—at least they thought it was secret,
but such things are impossible in our time. The pen is everywhere—its
sharp point penetrates through the thickest wall. They united, formed
themselves into an association, voted funds—secret also—hired
speakers and hired roughs.
</p>

<p>
It all leaked out. The <i>Stirmingham Daily News</i>—Baskette’s
paper—came out with a report and a leader, and held up the poor heir to
the commiseration of the people. See what a combination against
him!—anything to keep him out of his rights. Hired speakers to talk him
down—hired roughs to knock him on the head. Vested interests arrayed
against him—poor heir! How deeply to be pitied! How greatly to be
sympathised with! The paper used stronger language than this, and hinted at
“gangs of foul conspirators,” but that was not gentlemanly.
</p>

<p>
The exposure was worth a thousand votes to Baskette. But though exposed, the
Corporation and the companies never ceased their efforts. Between them they
comprised almost all of the rich employers of labour. They had one terrible
engine—a fearful instrument of oppression and torture—invented in
our modern days, in order that we may not get free and “become as
gods.” They put on the screw.
</p>

<p>
There is not a working man in England, from the hedger and ditcher, and the
wretch who breaks the flints by the roadside, up to the best paid clerk or
manager of a bank—not one single man who receives wages from
another—who does not know the meaning of that word.
</p>

<p>
Let no one imagine that the “screw” is confined in its operation to
the needy artisan or the labourer. It extends into all ranks of society,
poisons every family circle, tortures every tenant and householder—all
who in any way depend for comfort, luxury, or peace upon another person. There
is but one rank who are free—the few who, whether for wages or as
tenants, never have to look to others.
</p>

<p>
Society is divided into two sections—the first, infinitely numerous, and
the second, infinitely few—i.e., the Screwed-down, and the Screw-drivers.
Now, the Corporation and the companies were the screw-drivers, and they twisted
the horrible engine up tight.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps they gave it one turn too many; at all events the mob set up a yell.
They formed processions and marched about the streets with bundles of screws,
strung like bunches of keys, at the end of poles. Squibs flew in all
directions—too personal to be quoted here. Somebody wrote a parody on
“John Brown’s Knapsack”—representing old Sternhold
Baskette as John Brown, and his soul as marching on. This, set to music,
resounded in every corner.
</p>

<p>
It is sad, but it is true. Everything might still have gone off pretty quiet,
had it not been for religion, or rather pseudo-religion. There were in the city
vast numbers of workmen of the lowest class from Ireland, and when the
watchwords “Orangemen” and “Papists” are mentioned,
every one will understand. Fights occurred hourly—a grand battle-royal
was imminent. The grey rats did all they could to foster the animosity, and got
up sham quarrels to set fire to the excited passions of the mob. Their game was
riot, in order that they might plunder. While the fools were fighting and the
wise men trying to put them down, the grey rats meant to make off with all they
could get.
</p>

<p>
Aymer, having by this time made for himself some little reputation for
intelligence and quick observation, was sent out by the committee, of which
Broughton was chairman, to watch the temper of the people; to penetrate into
all the corners and out-of-the-way places; to hang on the skirts of the crowd
and pick up their hopes and wishes, and to make reports from time to time as
anything struck him. He was even to bring in the lampoons and squibs that were
circulated, and, if possible, to spy out the secret doings of the other
party—a commission which gave him liberty to roam. He wished to be gone,
but this was better than the close office-work. He should see something of
life; he should see man face to face. (In gilded salons and well-bred society
it is only the profile one sees—the full face is averted.) He put on his
roughest suit, took his note-book, and strolled out into the city.
</p>

<p>
The first thing he had to report was that an insinuation which had been spread
abroad against Baskette was actually working in his favour. It had been thrown
out that he was upon too familiar terms with a certain lady, singer and
actress, the fame of whose wonderful beauty was sullied with suspicions of her
frailty. With a certain section of the people, who prided themselves upon being
“English to the backbone,” this was resented as unfair. With a far
larger portion it was at once believed, and, amid sly nods and winks, taken as
another proof that Baskette was one of themselves.
</p>

<p>
Aymer wandered about the city; he saw its horrors, its crime. At such a period
the sin, the wickedness and misery which commonly lurks in corners, came out
and flaunted in the daylight. A great horror fell upon him—a horror of
the drunkenness, the cursing, the immorality, the fierce brutishness. He
shuddered. Not that he was himself pure, but he was sensitive and quick to
understand, to see beneath the surface. He was of an age when the mind deals
with broad generalities. If this was the state of one city only—then,
poor England!
</p>

<p>
His imagination pictured a time when this monster might be uppermost. One night
he ascended the tower of a great brewery and looked down upon the city, all
flaring with gas. Up from the depth came the shouting, the hum of thousands,
the tramp of the multitudes. He looked afar. The horizon was bright with
blazing fires—the sky red with a crimson and yellow glow. Not a star, was
visible, a dense cloud of smoke hid everything. The iron furnaces shot forth
their glowing flames, the engines puffed and snorted. He thought of Violet and
trembled: when the monster was let loose, what then?
</p>

<p>
He descended and wandered away he knew not exactly whither, but he found
himself towards midnight mixed in a crowd around the police station. Jammed in
amid, the throng he was shoved against the wall, but fortunately a lamp-post
preserved him from the crush. However, he could not move. The gas-light fell
upon the wall and lit up the proclamations of “V.R.”—the
advertisements of missing and lost, the descriptions of persons who were
wanted, etc.
</p>

<p>
One sheet, half-defaced with the wind and rain and mud splashed against it,
caught his eye—
</p>

<p>
“Escaped,” so ran the fragment, “from... mingham Asylum, a
lunatic of homicidal tendencies... Stabbed a warder... killed his wife by
driving a nail into her head... Is at large. His description—Long grey
hair, restless eye, peculiar ears, walks with a shambling gait, and has a
melancholy expression of countenance. Plays fantastic airs upon a tin whistle,
and is particularly fond of tinkering.”
</p>

<p>
A new bill, “Two Hundred Pounds Reward,” for the apprehension of a
defaulting bank manager, blotted out the rest.
</p>

<p>
But Aymer had read enough. A sickening sensation seized him—this horrible
being loose upon society, tinkering, playing upon a tin whistle, and driving
nails into women’s heads! In his ears sounded the din of tremendous
shouts, “Baskette for ever!” and he saw a carriage go by from which
the horses had been taken, and in which a man was standing upright, with his
hat off, bowing. It was Marese Baskette returning from an evening meeting, and
dragged in his carriage by the mob to his hotel.
</p>

<p>
Aymer caught a glance of his dark eye flashing with triumph, and it left an
unpleasant impression upon him. But the shouts rose up to the thick cloud of
smoke overhead—“Baskette for ever! Baskette for ever!”
</p>

<p>
“Oh! my love,” wrote Aymer to Violet, “this is, indeed, an
awful place. I begin to live in dread of my fellow-creatures. Not for
worlds—no, not for worlds, would I be the owner of this city (as so many
are striving to be), lest I should be held, partly at least, responsible
hereafter for its miseries, its crimes, its drunkenness, its nameless,
indefinable horrors.”
</p>

<p>
These words, read by what afterwards happened, are remarkable. Aymer’s
last vision of Stirmingham was the same man drawn again in his carriage amid
tenfold louder shouts than before, “Baskette for ever!” He headed
the poll by over 1000 votes.
</p>



<p>
The grey rats were triumphant.
</p>

<p>
End of Volume Two.
</p>


