<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-3-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
			<p>A fortnight after Dando’s establishment at The Towers, Aymer came. He looked ill, pale, and careworn, and at once announced that he had left <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Broughton, and was going to London, literally to seek his fortune.</p>
			<p>The monotony had at last proved too much for him, and worse than that was the miserable thought that, after all this work and patience, he was no nearer to Violet. Perhaps after ten or fifteen years of unremitting labour, nine-tenths of which time must be spent at a distance from her, he might, if his health lasted and no accident happened, be in receipt of one hundred and fifty pounds per annum; and how much more forward would he be then?</p>
			<p>Not all the poverty and restraint of the years upon Wick Farm at World’s End, not all the terrible disappointment on the very day when every hope seemed on the point of realisation; nothing could dull his vivid imagination, or make him abate one iota of the future which he had marked out for Violet.</p>
			<p>In truth, she wondered why he had never asked her to come to him⁠—to be married and live with him in his humble lodgings at Barnham. She would have been happy and content. But to Aymer the idea was impossible. All the romance of his life was woven around her head; he would not bring her to miserable back rooms, to a confined narrow life in a third-class street. It would have been to admit that his whole being was a failure; that he had formed hopes and dreamed dreams beyond his power ever to grasp, and his spirit was not yet broken to that. No, he would struggle and work, and bear anything for Violet’s sake. Anything but this miserable monotony without progress. Had there been progress, however slow, he might have tamed his impatient mind and forced himself to endure it.</p>
			<p>Day after day passed, the nights came and went, and each morning found him precisely in the same position as before. His organisation was too sensitive, too highly wrought, eager, nervous, for the dull plodding of daily life. He chafed against it, till dark circles formed themselves under his eyelids⁠—circles which sleep would not remove. These were partly caused by overwork.</p>
			<p>Broughton, on returning from Stirmingham, found his affairs at Barnham had got into a fearful state of muddle, and Aymer had to assist him to clear the Augean stable of accumulated correspondence, and satisfy neglected clients. Often, after a long day’s work, he had to carry accounts or correspondence home with him and finish it there, and then after that he would open his own plain simple desk⁠—much such a desk as the one that had belonged to poor Cornet De Warren⁠—and resume his interrupted <abbr class="eoc">MS.</abbr></p>
			<p>After a while it became unbearable; the poor fellow grew desperate. He might not have so soon given way, had not a slight attack of illness, not sufficient to confine him indoors, added to the tension of his nerves. He determined to stay on until his <abbr>MS.</abbr> was finished⁠—till the last word had been written, and the last sketch elaborated⁠—then he would go to London, no matter what became of him. If all else failed he could, at the last, return to Wick Farm; they would give him a bed and a crust, and he would be no worse off than before.</p>
			<p>He toiled at his book at midnight, and long hours afterwards, when the good people of Barnham town were calmly sleeping the sleep of the just, and permitting the talent in their midst to eat its own heart. At last it was finished, and he left.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Broughton wished him to stay, offered to increase his salary, said that he had become really useful, and even, as a personal favour, begged him to remain. Aymer thanked him sincerely, but was firm⁠—he must go. So far as was possible he explained to Broughton the reason, and the lawyer, hard as he was, had sufficient power of understanding others to perceive the real state of affairs. He warned Aymer that certain disappointment awaited him in London, that no publisher would issue a book by an unknown author unless paid for it. Aymer shook his head sadly⁠—he had known that well enough long ago, but he must go.</p>
			<p>Broughton shook hands with him, gave him a five-pound note over and above his salary, and told him if in distress, as he prophesied he would certainly soon be, to write to him, or else return.</p>
			<p>Aymer again thanked him, packed his modest little portmanteau, and taking with him his manuscript, went to The Towers to say farewell to Violet.</p>
			<p>When Agnes understood the course he had decided on, she said that she thought he had done right. To any other she should have said differently; to any other of a less highly organised mind she should have said, “Why, you cannot find a better opening.” But what would have been meat to others was poison to Aymer. Therefore she applauded his resolution, and told him to go forth and conquer, but first to stay a few days with Violet.</p>
			<p>This language greatly cheered poor Aymer, and for a few days he was in a species of Paradise.</p>
			<p>It was not even yet fully spring⁠—the wind was cold at times, but still they could go out freely; and with Violet at his side, and Dando bounding along in front, it seemed almost like a return to the old joyous times at World’s End.</p>
			<p>The hours flew by, and when the last day came it seemed as if but a few minutes had elapsed. It happened to be a wet day⁠—the spring showers were falling steadily, and, unable to go out, they rambled into the old mansion, and strolled from room to room.</p>
			<p>The groom had been ordered to get the dogcart out by a certain time to take Aymer seven miles to the nearest railway station. That station was but a small one, and two up-trains only stopped there in the course of the day⁠—if he missed this he would not reach London that night.</p>
			<p>Forgetful of time, perhaps half purposely forgetful, Aymer lingered on, and could not tear himself away.</p>
			<p>At length the groom, tired of waiting in the rain, and anxious about the time, waived all ceremony, and came to seek his passenger.</p>
			<p>Aymer pressed Violet’s hand, kissed it, and was gone, not daring to look back.</p>
			<p>The wheels grated on the gravel, and Violet remained where he had left her.</p>
			<p>Agnes came presently and found her, and started. The farewell had been given in the Blue Room.</p>
			<p>“You did not say farewell here?” said Agnes, with emphasis.</p>
			<p>Violet admitted it.</p>
			<p>“Good Heavens⁠—what an evil omen!” muttered Agnes, and drew her from the spot.</p>
			<p>From that very room De Warren had gone forth to his fate: from that room Aymer had started to win himself a way in the world.</p>
			<p>It was late at night when he reached London. Nothing could be done till the morning. As he had no experience of the ways of the metropolis, Aymer naturally paid about half as much again as was necessary, and reckoning up his slender stock of money, foresaw that he could not long remain in town at this rate.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Broughton had given him a written introduction to a firm of law-publishers and stationers with whom he dealt⁠—not that they would be of any use to him in themselves, but in the idea that they might have connections who could serve him.</p>
			<p>Upon these gentlemen he waited in the morning, and was fairly well received. They gave him a note to another firm who were in a more popular line of business. Aymer trudged thither, and found these people very offhanded and very busy. They glanced at his manuscript⁠—not in their line. Had he anything that would be likely to take with boys?⁠—illustrated fiction sold best for boys and girls. Ah, well! they were sorry and very busy. Suppose he tried so-and-so?</p>
			<p>This process, or pretty much the same process, was repeated for two or three days, until poor Aymer, naturally enough, lost heart.</p>
			<p>As he left one publisher’s shop, a clerk, who was writing at his desk near the door, noticed his careworn look, and having once gone through a somewhat similar experience, and seeing “gentleman” marked upon his features, asked him if he would show him the work.</p>
			<p>Aymer did so. The clerk, an experienced man, turned over the illustrations carefully, and then appeared to ponder.</p>
			<p>“These are good,” he said; “they would certainly take if they were published. But so also would a great many other things. The difficulty is to get them published, unless you have a name. Now take my advice⁠—It is useless carrying the <abbr>MS.</abbr> from door to door. You may tramp over London without success. Your best plan will be to bring it out at your own cost; once out you will get a reputation, and then you can sell your next. I don’t want to be personal, but have you any money? I see⁠—you have a little. Well, you need not pay all the cost. Go to so-and-so⁠—offer them, let me see, such-and-such a sum, and not a shilling more, and your business is done.”</p>
			<p>Aymer, as he walked along busy Fleet Street and up into the Strand, thought over this advice, and it sounded reasonable enough⁠—too reasonable. For he had so little money. When all he had saved from the gift of fifty pounds, his salary, and Broughton’s present, were added together, he had but forty-seven pounds. Out of this he was advised to expend forty pounds in one lump; to him it seemed like risking a fortune. But Violet? His book? He could not help, even after all his disappointments, feeling a certain faith in his book.</p>
			<p>Westwards he walked, past the famous bronze lions, and the idea came into his mind⁠—How did the hero of Trafalgar win his fame? Was it not by courage only⁠—simple courage? On, then. He went to the firm mentioned. They haggled for a larger sum; but Aymer was firm, for the simple reason that he had no more to give. Then they wanted a few days to consider.</p>
			<p>This he could not refuse; and these days passed slowly, while his stock of money diminished every hour. Finally they agreed to publish the work, but bound him down to such conditions, that it was hard to see how he could recover a tenth part of his investment, much less obtain a profit. He signed the agreement, paid the money, and walked forth.</p>
			<p>He went up the steps to the National Gallery, barely knowing what he did. He stood and gazed down upon the great square, with the lions and the fountains, and the busy stream of human life flowing forever round it. A proud feeling swelled up within. At last his book would be seen and read, his name would be known, and then⁠—Violet!</p>
			<p>Days and weeks went by, and yet no proofs came to his humble lodgings, or rather sleeping place, for all day he wandered to and fro in the great city. When he called at the publishers’ office they treated him with supercilious indifference, and⁠—“Really did not know that the immediate appearance of the little book was so important.” There were other works they had had in hand previously, and which must have priority.</p>
			<p>Aymer wandered about, not only into the great thoroughfares and the famous streets of the City and West End, but eastwards down to the docks, filled with curiosity, observing everything, storing his mind with facts and characteristics for future use, and meantime starving⁠—for it was rapidly coming to that; and the descent was facilitated by a misfortune which befell him in Shoreditch, where, as he was standing near a passage or court in a crowd, a thief made off with three pounds out of his remaining five.</p>
			<p>It is easy to say⁠—Why did not Aymer get work? But how was he to do so with no money to advertise, no introductions, no kind of security to give, a perfect stranger? He did try. He called upon some firms who advertised in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Telegraph</i>. The very first question was⁠—Where do you come from? The country! That answer was sufficient. They wanted a man up to London work and to the ways of the City. Aymer modestly said he could learn. “Yes,” they replied, “and we must pay for your education. Good morning.”</p>
			<p>Economise as much as he would, the two pounds left dwindled and dwindled, till the inevitable end came, and the last half sovereign melted into five shillings, the five shillings into half-a-crown, the half-a-crown into a single solitary shilling. Driven to the last extremity, Aymer hit upon the idea of manual labour. He was not a powerful man, he could not lift a heavy weight, but he could bear a great deal of fatigue. He looked round him, he saw hundreds at work, and yet there did not seem any place where he could go and ask for employment.</p>
			<p>By a kind of instinct he wandered down to the river and along the wharves. There he saw men busy unloading the barges and smaller craft. Summoning up courage, he spoke to one of the labourers, who stared, and then burst into a broad grin. Aymer turned away, but was called back. The ganger looked him up and down and offered him half-a-crown a day; the others earned three shillings and sixpence and four shillings, but they were strong, strapping fellows. Aymer accepted it, for indeed he could not help himself and in a few minutes the poet, author, artist, with his coat off, was rolling small casks across the wharf. At first he was awkward, and hurt himself; the rest laughed at him, but good-humouredly. Some offered him beer.</p>
			<p>At six o’clock he, with the rest, was called to a small office and received his day’s wages⁠—two shillings and sixpence. He made a meal, the first that day, at a cheap eating-house, and then set out to return to his wretched lodgings, tired, worn out, miserable, yet not despairing, for he had found a means which would enable him to live, and to wait⁠—to wait till the book came out.</p>
			<p>For a fortnight Aymer worked at the wharf, and had become a favourite with the men. Noting his handiness and activity, and seeing that he was well educated, he was now put into an office of some little trust, to check the goods as they were landed, and received an advance of eighteen-pence, making a daily wage of four shillings. This seemed an immense improvement; but he was obliged to borrow a week’s extra salary in advance to buy a new pair of boots, and was therefore very little better off.</p>
			<p>Strolling slowly one evening up Cannon Street, Aymer met the great stream of city men and merchants, clerks and agents, which at that time pours out of the warehouses and offices, setting across London Bridge towards the suburbs.</p>
			<p>He walked slowly, all but despondently. It was already a week since he had written to Violet⁠—that in itself was a strong proof of his condition of mind. It is very easy for those who have got everything, to pray each Sunday against envy, and to repeat with unction the response after the command not to covet thy neighbour’s goods. It is a different matter when one is practically destitute, when the mere value of the chain that hangs so daintily from my lady’s neck⁠—ay, the price of the muff that warms her delicate hands⁠—would be as a fortune, and lift the heart up out of the mire.</p>
			<p>He could not help thinking that if he had but the money, the value, of a single much-despised pony that drew a greengrocer’s cart he should be almost a prince.</p>
			<p>He passed under Temple Bar, and entered the busy Strand, walking, as it happened⁠—events always happen, and no one can say what that word really means⁠—on the right hand pavement, facing westwards. Painfully and wearily walking, he came to the church where the pavement makes a détour, and hesitated for a moment whether to cross to the other side or go round the church, and decided, as the road was dirty, and his old boots thin and full of holes, to follow the pavement. “Circumstances over which we have no control”⁠—these circumstances generally commence in the smallest, least noticeable trifles. It so happened⁠—there it is again⁠—will anyone explain why it so happened?⁠—that as he reached the entrance to Holywell Street, he glanced up it, and saw for the first time that avenue of old books. The author’s instinct made him first pause, and then go up it⁠—he was tired, but he must go and look. Dingy and dirty, but tempting to a man whose library had been obtained by wiring hares. He thought, with a sigh, how many more books he could have bought with his money had he known of the existence of this cheap mart, or had he had any access to it. Here was Bohn’s Plato⁠—for which he had paid a hardly got thirty shillings⁠—marked up at fifteen shillings, slightly soiled it was true, but what did that matter? Here was old Herodotus⁠—Bohn’s⁠—marked at eighteen-pence, the very book which had cost him three hares, including carriage. The margins were all scribbled over⁠—odd faces and odder animals rudely sketched in pen and ink, evidently some schoolboy’s crib. But what did that matter, so long as the text was complete⁠—he cared for nothing but the text. As he lingered and heard the bells chiming seven o’clock, his eye caught sight of a little book called “A Fortune for a Shilling.”</p>
			<p>It was a catching title; he remembered seeing it lying upon the itinerant bookseller’s stall in front of the Sternhold Hall. He looked at it, weighed it in his hand. He smiled sadly at his own folly. He had but fifteen pence in his pocket, and to think of throwing a whole shilling away upon such a lottery! It was absurd⁠—childish; and yet the book fascinated him. The bookseller’s assistant came out, ostensibly to dust the books⁠—really to see that none were pocketed. Aymer ran his eye down the pages of the book, feeling all the while as if he were cheating the bookseller of his money. The assistant said, “Only one shilling, sir; a chance for everybody, sir, in that book.” Aymer shut his eyes to his own folly, paid the money, and returned into the Strand with threepence left.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
